2015–16 UEFA Europa League
The 2015–16 UEFA Europa League is the 45th season of Europe's secondary club football tournament organised by UEFA, and the 7th season since it was renamed from the UEFA Cup to the UEFA Europa League.
The 2016 UEFA Europa League Final will be played at the St. Jakob-Park in Basel, Switzerland.
Sevilla won the two most recent tournaments. As they automatically qualified for the 2015–16 UEFA Champions League group stage as the Europa League title holders, they will not be able to defend their title unless they finish third in the Champions League group stage.


== Format changes ==
The UEFA Executive Committee held in May and September 2013 approved the following changes to the UEFA Europa League starting from the 2015–16 season (for the three-year cycle until the 2017–18 season):
The title holders of the UEFA Europa League will qualify for the UEFA Champions League, and therefore no Europa League berth will be reserved for them (although it is still possible for them to defend their title if they drop down to the Europa League after Champions League elimination).
All associations will have a maximum of three teams entering the Europa League (excluding those transferred from the Champions League); previously associations 7–9 each had four entrants (the only exception is when both the Champions League title holders and the Europa League title holders are from the same top three ranked association and do not qualify for either the Champions League or Europa League through domestic competitions, and the fourth-placed team of their association enter the Europa League instead of the Champions League because a maximum of five teams from one association can enter the Champions League, meaning in this case, four teams from their association enter the Europa League).
The number of teams directly qualifying for the group stage will be increased to 16 teams (from the top 12 associations); previously six teams (from the top six associations) directly qualified for the group stage.
Should the domestic cup winners qualify for the Champions League, the cup runners-up will no longer be granted a spot in the Europa League, and the spot will be given to the highest-placed team in the league which have not yet qualified for European competitions.


== Association team allocation ==
A total of 191 teams from all 54 UEFA member associations participate in the 2015–16 UEFA Europa League. The association ranking based on the UEFA country coefficients is used to determine the number of participating teams for each association:
Associations 1–51 (except Liechtenstein) each have three teams qualify.
Associations 52–53 each have two teams qualify.
Liechtenstein and Gibraltar each have one team qualify (Liechtenstein organises only a domestic cup and no domestic league; Gibraltar as per decision by the UEFA Executive Committee).
The top three associations of the 2014–15 UEFA Respect Fair Play ranking each gain an additional berth (the 2015–16 season will be the last where Fair Play berths are allocated to the Europa League).
Moreover, 33 teams eliminated from the 2015–16 UEFA Champions League are transferred to the Europa League.
Since the winners of the 2014–15 UEFA Europa League (which automatically qualified for the 2015–16 UEFA Champions League), Sevilla, also qualified for the 2015–16 UEFA Europa League as the fifth-placed team of the 2014–15 La Liga, their berth in the Europa League is vacated and not replaced by any other team.


=== Association ranking ===
For the 2015–16 UEFA Europa League, the associations are allocated places according to their 2014 UEFA country coefficients, which takes into account their performance in European competitions from 2009–10 to 2013–14.
Apart from the allocation based on the country coefficients, associations may have additional teams participating in the Europa League, as noted below:
(FP) – Additional berth via Fair Play ranking (Netherlands, England, Republic of Ireland)
(CL) – Additional teams transferred from the Champions League
(EL) – Vacated berth due to Europa League title holders playing in the Champions League


=== Distribution ===
In the default access list, the Europa League title holders Sevilla enter the group stage (as the fifth-placed team of the 2014–15 La Liga). However, since they automatically qualified for the Champions League group stage, the spot which they qualified for in the Europa League group stage is vacated, and the following changes to the default allocation system are made:
The domestic cup winners of association 13 (Switzerland) are promoted from the third qualifying round to the group stage.
The domestic cup winners of association 18 (Cyprus) are promoted from the second qualifying round to the third qualifying round.
The domestic cup winners of associations 24 and 25 (Sweden and Bulgaria) are promoted from the first qualifying round to the second qualifying round.


==== Redistribution rules ====
A Europa League place is vacated when a team qualifies for both the Champions League and the Europa League, or qualifies for the Europa League by more than one method. When a place is vacated, it is redistributed within the national association by the following rules (regulations Articles 3.03 and 3.04):
When the domestic cup winners (considered as the "highest-placed" qualifier within the national association with the latest starting round) also qualify for the Champions League, their Europa League place is vacated. As a result, the highest-placed team in the league which have not yet qualified for European competitions qualify for the Europa League, with the Europa League qualifiers which finish above them in the league moved up one "place" (the 2015–16 season will be the first with this particular arrangement where the domestic cup runners-up are no longer guaranteed a place in the Europa League in this scenario).
When the domestic cup winners also qualify for the Europa League through league position, their place through the league position is vacated. As a result, the highest-placed team in the league which have not yet qualified for European competitions qualify for the Europa League, with the Europa League qualifiers which finish above them in the league moved up one "place" if possible.
For associations where a Europa League place is reserved for the League Cup winners, they always qualify for the Europa League as the "lowest-placed" qualifier. If the League Cup winners have already qualified for European competitions through other methods, this reserved Europa League place is taken by the highest-placed team in the league which have not yet qualified for European competitions.
A Fair Play place is taken by the highest-ranked team in the domestic Fair Play table which have not yet qualified for European competitions.


=== Teams ===
The labels in the parentheses show how each team qualified for the place of its starting round:
CW: Cup winners
2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, etc.: League position
LC: League Cup winners
P-W: End-of-season Europa League play-off winners
FP: Fair Play
UCL: Transferred from the Champions League
GS: Third-placed teams from the group stage
PO: Losers from the play-off round
Q3: Losers from the third qualifying round

Notably two teams take part in the competition that do not currently play in their national top-division. They are Go Ahead Eagles (2nd tier) and UCD (2nd tier).
Notes


== Round and draw dates ==
The schedule of the competition is as follows (all draws held at UEFA headquarters in Nyon, Switzerland, unless stated otherwise).
Matches in the qualifying, play-off, and knockout rounds may also be played on Tuesdays or Wednesdays instead of the regular Thursdays due to scheduling conflicts.


== Qualifying rounds ==

In the qualifying rounds and the play-off round, teams are divided into seeded and unseeded teams based on their 2015 UEFA club coefficients, and then drawn into two-legged home-and-away ties. Teams from the same association cannot be drawn against each other.


=== First qualifying round ===
The draw for the first and second qualifying round was held on 22 June 2015. With 102 teams involved, it was UEFA's biggest ever tournament draw. The first legs were played on 30 June and 2 July, and the second legs were played on 7 and 9 July 2015.
Notes


=== Second qualifying round ===
The first legs were played on 16 July, and the second legs were played on 21 and 23 July 2015.


=== Third qualifying round ===
The draw for the third qualifying round was held on 17 July 2015. The first legs were played on 29 and 30 July, and the second legs were played on 6 August 2015.
Notes


== Play-off round ==

The draw for the play-off round was held on 7 August 2015. The first legs will be played on 20 August, and the second legs will be played on 27 August 2015.
Notes


== Group stage ==

The draw for the group stage will be held in Monaco on 28 August 2015. The 48 teams are drawn into twelve groups of four, with the restriction that teams from the same association cannot be drawn against each other. For the draw, the teams are seeded into four pots based on their 2015 UEFA club coefficients.
In each group, teams play against each other home-and-away in a round-robin format. The group winners and runners-up advance to the round of 32, where they are joined by the eight third-placed teams of the 2015–16 UEFA Champions League group stage. The matchdays are 17 September, 1 October, 22 October, 5 November, 26 November, and 10 December 2015.
A total of 48 teams play in the group stage: 16 teams which enter in this stage, the 22 winners of the play-off round, and the 10 losers of the 2015–16 UEFA Champions League play-off round.
Note: UEFA club coefficient (CC) at the end of 2014–15 season, which is used for seeding, is listed in italics.


== Knockout phase ==
In the knockout phase, teams play against each other over two legs on a home-and-away basis, except for the one-match final. The mechanism of the draws for each round is as follows:
In the draw for the round of 32, the twelve group winners and the four third-placed teams from the Champions League group stage with the better group records are seeded, and the twelve group runners-up and the other four third-placed teams from the Champions League group stage are unseeded. The seeded teams are drawn against the unseeded teams, with the seeded teams hosting the second leg. Teams from the same group or the same association cannot be drawn against each other.
In the draw for the round of 16, there are seedings (regulations Article 17.03, although the seeding criteria are unspecified), with the seeded teams hosting the second leg. Teams from the same group can be drawn against each other, but teams from the same association cannot be drawn against each other (changed from previous seasons where an open draw was used in the round of 16).
In the draws for the quarter-finals onwards, there are no seedings, and teams from the same group or the same association can be drawn against each other.


=== Round of 32 ===
The draw for the round of 32 will be held on 14 December 2015. The first legs will be played on 18 February 2016, and the second legs will be played on 25 February 2016.


=== Round of 16 ===
The draw for the round of 16 will be held on 26 February 2016. The first legs will be played on 10 March, and the second legs will be played on 17 March 2016.


=== Quarter-finals ===
The draw for the quarter-finals will be held on 18 March 2016. The first legs will be played on 7 April, and the second legs will be played on 14 April 2016.


=== Semi-finals ===
The draw for the semi-finals will be held on 15 April 2016. The first legs will be played on 28 April, and the second legs will be played on 5 May 2016.


=== Final ===

The final will be played on 18 May 2016 at the St. Jakob-Park in Basel, Switzerland. The "home" team (for administrative purposes) will be determined by an additional draw held after the semi-final draw.


== See also ==
2015–16 UEFA Champions League
2016 UEFA Super Cup


== References ==


== External links ==
UEFA Europa League (official website)