Bajrangi Bhaijaan
Bajrangi Bhaijaan is a 2015 Indian film directed by Kabir Khan. Scripted by V. Vijayendra Prasad, the film has been produced by Salman Khan and Rockline Venkatesh. It features Salman Khan, Harshaali Malhotra, Kareena Kapoor and Nawazuddin Siddiqui in lead roles. Principal photography began in New Delhi in November 2014, and the film had a worldwide release on July 17, 2015 during the Eid weekend.
Bajrangi Bhaijaan has emerged as Salman Khan's biggest hit to date, breaking several box office records in India and abroad. It has become the fastest Hindi film to gross Rs1 billion net domestically and is currently is the second highest-grossing Bollywood film of all time in India and second highest-grossing Bollywood film of all time in international markets. Bajrangi Bhaijaan is also the third Indian film and second Hindi film to net Rs 3 billion in India and fourth Indian film to gross Rs 5 billion worldwide.


== PlotEdit ==
The film starts with a Muslim family watching TV in Sultanpur village, Azad Kashmir, Pakistan and an expectant mother's (Meher Vij) baby kicks when Shahid Afridi leads Pakistan to victory in an India–Pakistan cricket match. A few years later, the baby grows up to be a young speech-impaired girl, Shahida (Harshaali Malhotra). Her mother takes her to Hazrat Nizamuddin Auliya's Dargah in Delhi, India, to pray for her speech to return.
On their way back, in the middle of the night, right next to the Pakistan border, the train in which Shahida and her mother were traveling suddenly stops. While everyone is asleep she leaves the train to play with a lamb she saw stuck in a small ditch. The train starts as Shahida is playing with the lamb. She runs to catch it, but, realizing that she cannot, she tearfully watches the train cross through the border into Pakistan. Lost in India, she boards a freight train, reaching Kurukshetra.
In Kurukshetra, a Brahmin devout Shri Hanuman named Pawan Kumar Chaturvedi, also known as Bajrangi (Salman Khan), is dancing merrily with other worshipers. He feeds Shahida and she starts following him. Since she is fair-skinned, he assumes that she is a Brahmin. He buys her a Bajrang Bali pendant to protect her from harm. On the bus ride to Delhi, Bajrangi quizzes the little girl, and calls her Munni (Little Girl) to find out which city she's from, but she doesn't respond to any Indian town names. He asks her to call him "Maama" (maternal uncle) when she starts speaking. When he is asked by a fellow passenger about how he moved from his hometown of Pratapgarh to Delhi, Bajrangi told the passengers his life story.
Bajrangi narrates how he was a failure during childhood, and that it took him 20 years to earn his high school diploma. His father died of shock when he told him that he had finally passed. He moved to Delhi because it was his father's last wish that he leave him and stay there with a man named Dayanand, (Sharat Saxena) in order to find his own job. He tells the story of how he met a woman named Rasika (Kareena Kapoor) in Delhi; they met when a ticket collector on a bus asked Bajrangi to equally split a note of 10 rupees between Rasika and himself. When they got off the bus he persistently followed her. Exasperated, Rasika asked him to get change from a stall selling water bottles. While he is getting the change, she leaves.
Bajrangi eventually locates the place where Dayanand lives and finds him holding a wrestling competition there. Rasika — who also lives in the same building because she is Dayanand's daughter — sees Bajrangi with Dayanand. She claims that he had stalked her there and was harassing her. The other wrestlers grabbed Bajrangi, who managed to introduce himself as Pawan. Dayanand has him released and brought to stay in his house. Najrangi and Rasika gradually fell in love. When Rasika refused a marriage proposal in favor of Bajrangi, Dayanand said that he would have to prove himself worthy of Rasika. In order to gain Rasika's hand in marriage, he would have to find a decent job and buy a decent house in six months' time.
In present time, Bajrangi and Munni finally arrive in Delhi, and she is welcome in Dayanand's house. Munni quickly befriends everyone there and is accustomed to being part of the household. One day, at lunchtime, Munni manages to slip away unnoticed. They track her to their next door neighbors' house, where she is eating meat. Bajrangi is then convinced that she is not a Brahmin, but in fact a Kshatriya. One day, while Bajrangi, Rasika, and Munni are outside shopping, Munni steals bangles from a stall. Bajrangi then makes her return them and makes her pray to Bajrang Bali for forgiveness. While he is lost in prayer, Munni once again manages to slip away. Bajrangi sees Munni enter a mosque and tries to stop her. Once he finds Munni wrapping a hijab around her head and praying in the mosque, he realizes that she is a Muslim. This makes him nervous as he knows that Dayanand is hateful of non-Hindus. Rasika says that they should keep it all a secret. However, her plans are foiled when Munni cheers at Pakistan's victory during an India-Pakistan cricket match and kisses the Pakistani flag on the TV. Everyone is shocked to learn that she is a Pakistani. Dayanand then says that she is not welcome in his house and that Bajrangi will have to send her home immediately. They visit the Pakistani embassy, but a violent protest forces the authorities to shut it down for a month.
He strikes a deal with a travel agent and uses the money he has been saving for the house to pay the agent, who promises to find a route to her home that will not require a visa. However, Bajrangi is devastated to learn that the agent had in fact taken her to a brothel. He beats everyone involved and than takes Munni back with him, vowing to bring her home on his own. With great difficulty, they manage to get the Pakistani army's permission to cross the border. Shortly after arriving in Pakistan, Bajrangi is arrested on the grounds that he is an Indian spy. At the police station, Munni sees a scenic photograph on a calendar, indicating that she comes from that area. Bajrangi beats several policemen and escapes from their custody because one of them had mistreated the girl. He meets Chand Nawab (Nawazuddin Siddiqui), a journalist working for a Pakistani TV channel, who initially thinks that Bajrangi is an Indian spy. He soon realizes his mistake and joins Bajrangi in the noble task of finding Munni's parents. The police are after them, but they manage to hide themselves in a madrassa. The head of the madrassa turns out to be a nice person and helps them in their quest. Bajrangi shows him the photograph to know where the girl was from. He tells them that it could be in Pakistan-administered Kashmir. He even helps them avoid capture by the police.
Upon reaching Kashmir, they visit a shrine. Munni's mother is also praying there, but they do not meet. Chand leaves the shrine to make a few calls. He contacts a number of TV channels to tell them the story of Bajrangi, but they refuse to air it. He decides films a video of himself telling the story, and uploads the video on YouTube. While watching this video on Chand's camera, Munni recognizes her mother walking by. The footage showed her get off the bus. With the help of a driver, who calls out the name of previous bus stops, they find out Munni's mother had boarded the bus from Sultanpur, to which Munni raises her hand, finally identifying her home.
They leave for Sultanpur by bus. On their way, they spot a group of policemen, that are about to check their bus for Bajrangi. Bajrangi devises a plan to get the polices' attention. He gets off the bus and creates a scene. Once the police visually identify him as "the Indian spy", he flees. When the officers catch him, they beat him. He runs away again, and just as he is about to escape, he is shot and falls into a river. Meanwhile, Chand and Munni find Sultanpur, where Munni is finally reunited with her mother. Bajrangi is revealed to be alive, and held hostage in a police station, where the Pakistani officers are brutally torturing him.
The video uploaded by Chand goes viral throughout India and Pakistan. A compassionate senior officer realizes that Bajrangi is innocent, and has him released, defying the orders of an even higher ranked officer who is bent on getting him jailed. Thousands of Pakistanis come to see Bajrangi off. They cheer him on by shouting "Bajrangi Bhaijaan". Shahida is also in the crowd. As Bajrangi is about to enter India, she comes forward, and calls out, "Jai Shree Ram, Maama!" Bajrangi, managing to hear her voice over the thousands of cheering Indians and Pakistanis, looks back. They run towards each other and embrace.


== CastEdit ==
Salman Khan as Pawan Kumar Chaturvedi / Bajrangi
Kareena Kapoor as Rasika
Harshaali Malhotra as Munni (Shahida)
Nawazuddin Siddiqui as Chand Nawab (Pakistani Reporter)
Meher Vij as Shahida's Mother
Mir Sarwer as Shahida's Father
Najeem Khan as Young Pawan / Bajrangi
Kamlesh Gill as Passenger in train
Om Puri Special Appearance as Maulana
Sharat Saxena as Dayanand, Rasika's Father
Alka Kaushal as Rasika's Mother
Adnan Sami Guest Appearance in the song Bhardo Jholi Meri
Atul Srivastava as Bajrangi's Father
Rajesh Sharma as Senior Pakistani Police Officer


== ProductionEdit ==

K. V. Vijayendra Prasad is the screen writer of Bajrangi Bhaijaan, who is coincidentally writer of another South Indian blockbuster film Baahubali. The principal photography began on November 3, 2014 in New Delhi, with Salman Khan and Kareena Kapoor Khan participating. The second filming schedule took place at the ND Studios, Karjat. The third schedule of the film was held in Mandawa, Rajasthan. On 7 January 2015, Khan was seen on the top of castle of Mandawa playing cricket with a young boy. On 10 January 2015, Khan shot with school students in Rajasthan's Jhunjhunu district. Shooting of the film was completed on 20 May. Some scenes of the film were shot at Khan's Panvel farm house. Shooting of Bajrangi Bhaijaan also took place in Kashmir Valley in places like Sonmarg and Zoji La. The film's climax scene was shot at Sonmarg near the Thajiwas glacier (at 10,000 ft above sea level) with around 7000 people. Nawazuddin Siddiqui's character Chand Nawab was inspired by a real character Chaand Nawab, who was with Karachi-based Indus News in 2008.


== Allegations of copyrights infringementEdit ==
The movie includes a famous traditional qawwali Bhardo Jholi Meri Ya Muhammad sung by Sabri Brothers from Pakistan. The qawwali was revamped with the voice of Adnan Sami Khan for the Salman Khan-starrer and went viral soon after its release. However, it received mixed reviews, with many finding it bland owing to the incompatibility of Adnan’s sweet vocal texture for something as raw as a qawaali. Pakistan’s biggest record label EMI Pakistan and Amjad Sabri qawwal, heir to the famous Sabri brothers, have called for legal action against the producers of the film and the qawwali in separate instances.
“Revamping the qawwali without my permission or consent is simply unethical and inappropriate”, Amjad Sabri told the Daily Express. “This is not an ordinary kalaam, it’s the property of my family and will continue to be so for the coming seven generations. This is an asset of my father Ghulam Farid Sabri and my uncle Maqbool Ahmed Sabri.”


== SoundtrackEdit ==
The soundtrack of the album is composed by Pritam with lyrics written by Mayur Puri, Amitabh Bhattacharya, Neelesh Misra and Kausar Munir.


=== Track listingEdit ===


== ReleaseEdit ==
Bajrangi Bhaijaan was released on July 17, 2015, one day before Eid in 4,500 screens in India. The film also released in 50 countries outside India in more than 700 screens. The film was also released in Pakistan with some dialogue cuts. Bajrangi Bhaijaan released in more than 80 screens in Pakistan. Bajrangi Bhaijaan will also have a deferred release in some non-traditional markets such as Morocco, Tunisia, Korea, Taiwan and Poland later. Bajrangi Bhaijaan was declared tax free in Uttar Pradesh on 20 July 2015.


== Critical receptionEdit ==
Bajrangi Bhaijaan is a critically acclaimed film, having received positive reviews from film reviewers in India and abroad. Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave the movie 4.5 out of 5 stars and wrote, "This is Salman Khan's best movie to date. Also, it is, without doubt, his career's best performance. Wins you over completely. The movie merges humour, emotions and patriotism and creates a full-on entertainer." Srijana Mitra Das of The Times of India gave the film 4 out of 5 stars. Rajeev Masand of IBNLive gave the film 3 stars. Shubhra Gupta of Indian Express gave the film 2.5 stars. Suparna Sharma of Deccan Chronicle praised the film and gave it 4 stars. Raja Sen of Rediff.com termed Bajrangi Bhaijaan a solid crowd-pleaser and gave it 3.5 stars. Ayesha Siddiqa of The Express Tribune also praised the film as a refreshing human intervention.


== Box officeEdit ==
Bajrangi Bhaijaan went on to net ₹3.06 billion (US$47 million) in India  and grossed ₹1.50 billion (US$23 million) overseas for a worldwide gross of ₹5.47 billion (US$84 million) in 19 days and currently is the second highest-grossing Bollywood film of all time in domestic markets and third highest-grossing Bollywood film of all time in international markets. Bajrangi Bhaijaan became the quickest film to collect ₹1 billion (US$15 million) and ₹2 billion (US$31 million) net domestically beating PK and Dhoom 3. The distributor share of the fim has crossed ₹150 crore (US$23 million) crore which is a record in India being the second film to do so after PK. In August 2015, Eros International said in a statement to the Bombay Stock Exchange that Bajrangi Bhaijaan has become fastest Bollywood film to gross ₹500 crore (US$77 million) worldwide, while it crossed the ₹300 crore (US$46 million) at the domestic box office.


=== IndiaEdit ===
Bajrangi Bhaijaan opened to an overwhelming response at the domestic box office and went on to broke the first week record of PK and Happy New Year. The film grossed around ₹270 million (US$4.1 million) in India on the first day of release, and further showed incredible growth on its second and third day to net ₹350 million (US$5.4 million) setting new records in several circuits, and ₹385 million (US$5.9 million) on first Sunday to take its first weekend total to ₹1005 million (US$15 million), which is an all-time first weekend record, becoming the quickest film to collect ₹1 billion (US$15 million) net domestically. The film grossed ₹255 million (US$3.9 million) on its first Monday which is highest ever non-holiday Monday and ₹21.25 crore (US$3.3 million) its first Tuesday and ₹18 crore (US$2.8 million) on its first Wednesday and on Thursday ₹16 crore (US$2.5 million) to take its first week nett total to ₹183.52 crore (US$28 million) nett to make highest first week total for an Indian film in domestic markets beating previous record holder PK (film).
The film nett. grossed ₹13.50 crore (US$2.1 million) on its second Friday. The film showed further growth and nett. grossed ₹20.05 crore (US$3.1 million) on second Saturday and ₹24.05 crore (US$3.7 million) on second Sunday to make ₹57.50 crore (US$8.8 million), which is the highest 2nd weekend ever for an Indian film and to take its India total to ₹240.72 crore (US$37 million) in ten days and made highest 2nd weekend ever for an Indian film. Bajrangi Bhaijaan grossed around ₹10 crore (US$1.5 million) on second Monday to take its 11 days nett. Bajrangi Bhaijaan grossed around ₹9.3 crore (US$1.4 million) on second Tuesday, ₹9.1 crore (US$1.4 million) on second Wednesday ₹9.3 crore (US$1.4 million) on second ₹7.3 crore (US$1.1 million) on second Thursday and made a domestic gross of ₹250.02 crore (US$38 million) to make is currently the second highest 2nd week collection of all time. Bajrangi Bhaijaan grossed ₹87 crore (US$13 million) nett which is the second highest 2nd week collection of all time to take its two-week domestic nett. gross to ₹270.50 crore (US$41 million).
Bajrangi Bhaijaan nett. grossed ₹4 crore (US$610,000) on its third Friday. Bajrangi Bhaijaan showed growth and nett. grossed ₹6.08 crore (US$930,000) on its third Saturday. Bajrangi Bhaijaan furtjher showed growth and nett. grossed ₹9.08 crore (US$1.4 million) on its third Sunday to take its third weekend to ₹20 crore (US$3.1 million) which is the second highest 3rd weekend of all time. the film netted around ₹20 crore (US$3.1 million) in its third weekend, reaching ₹292 crore (US$45 million) nett in seventeen days in India to become second highest-grossing Bollywood film of all time in domestic markets beating Dhoom 3. The film went on to gross ₹1.53 billion (US$23 million) overseas for a worldwide gross of ₹540 crore (US$83 million) in just 17 days. Bajrangi Bhaijaan set a new all time lifetime record in India by becoming the highest grosser ever in Bihar as it went to the ₹7.50 crore (US$1.1 million) nett mark after its third weekend. Bajrangi Bhaijaan nett. grossed ₹3.50 crore (US$540,000) on its third Monday, ₹2.50 crore (US$380,000) on second Tuesday and ₹2.43 crore (US$370,000) on second Wednesday to take its 19 days total to ₹300.6 crore (US$46 million) in India and become only the 2nd Indian film to do so. Bajrangi Bhaijaan recorded the third highest third week ever as it grossed ₹2.50 crore (US$380,000) on third Thursady to make its week total to ₹30 crore (US$4.6 million) .
Bajrangi Bhaijaan grossed ₹7.25 crore (US$1.1 million) in its fourth weekend.


=== OverseasEdit ===
Bajrangi Bhaijaan grossed around $8.1 million in the first weekend in overseas markets, which is the second highest opening weekend for a Hindi film. The film has grossed around $2.45 million in its first weekend in US-Canada. Bajrangi Bhaijaan grossed ₨4.5 crore (US$440,000) in Pakistan in first 3 days of its release, and subsequently ₨6 crore (US$590,000) in the first week. The ten-day overseas gross of Bajrangi Bhaijaan is US$17 million plus. At the end of two weeks, Bajrangi Bhaijaan grossed US$20 million in overseas. Bajrangi Bhaijaan grossed around $23.5 million in overseas in 17 days. Bajrangi Bhaijaan has set an all-time record in the Gulf with collections of₹47.9 crore (US$7.3 million) till date to become the highest grossing film in the territory beating films like Happy New Year and Dhoom 3. The film is also the biggest Salman Khan film in The Gulf, beating previous best of Kick were around $4.1 million. The film has done excellent across all Overseas market according to Box Office India. In the United Kingdom film cross ₹15.96 crore (US$2.4 million) thus far and ₹44.7 crore (US$6.9 million) has come from the United States. The Overseas performance for the film is probably the best ever for a Salman Khan film since Hum Aapke Hain Kaun which opened up the overseas market.


== See alsoEdit ==
List of highest-grossing Indian films
List of highest-grossing Bollywood films of 2015


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
Bajrangi Bhaijaan at the Internet Movie Database
Bajrangi Bhaijaan at Bollywood Hungama