Big Brother 17 (U.S.)
Big Brother 17, also known as Big Brother: Takeover, is the seventeenth season of the American reality television series Big Brother. The season premiered on June 24, 2015, on CBS, and once again was a two night launch with the following episode airing on June 25, 2015. The season will end on September 23, 2015, with a 90-minute season finale following the fall season premiere of Survivor: Cambodia. This season is set to last 98 days, making it the longest season of the American version to date by one day. This season also features the highest number of HouseGuests to date with 17 in total.


== Season development ==
On September 24, 2014, CBS announced that it had renewed Big Brother for its seventeenth and eighteenth editions for broadcast in summer 2015 and 2016, respectively. The series would continue to be hosted by Julie Chen.
On June 15, 2015, CBS released pictures of the house via Entertainment Tonight, which has a modern steel beach house theme. The upstairs is 155 square feet larger than in previous seasons, due to the incorporation of a glass bridge added in by Big Brother house designer Scott Storey. Season 17 is the first season for which the live feeds will be bundled with CBS All Access, an over-the-top streaming service launched by CBS in January 2015 that allows users to view past and present episodes of CBS shows, and includes the live feeds and special Big Brother content.


=== Format ===
The format has changed slightly from previous seasons. The contestants, referred to as "houseguests," are sequestered in the Big Brother House with no contact to or from the outside world. Each week, the houseguests take part in several compulsory challenges that determine who will win food, luxuries and power in the house. At the start of each week, the houseguests compete in the Head of Household (HoH) competition. The two winners of the HoH competition each week will pick two nominees, who then go head-to-head in the Battle of the Block competition. The winning team is guaranteed safety through the next eviction, and overthrows the HoH who nominated them. The houseguests nominated for eviction by the other HoH then become the official nominees for the week. Partway through the season, the Battle of the Block twist will be retired, with only one houseguest being awarded HoH and two nominees at all times. The reigning HoH also earns the right to name the "Have-Nots" for the week, forcing the chosen houseguests to eat solely "Big Brother slop" and a weekly food selection chosen by the viewing public, take cold showers, and sleep in a bedroom designed to look like a dental clinic.
Each week, six houseguests are selected to compete in the Power of Veto competition: the reigning HoH, their two nominees, and three houseguests selected by random draw. The winner of the POV competition wins the right to either revoke the nomination of one of the nominated houseguests or leave them as is; if the Veto winner uses this power, the HoH must immediately nominate another houseguest for eviction. The houseguest overthrown as a result of the Battle of the Block competition is eligible to be nominated by the reigning Head of Household if the Veto is used.
On eviction night, all houseguests vote to evict one of the two nominees, with the exception of the nominees and the Head of Household, who is only allowed to vote in the event of a tie and, in that case, must do so publicly. This compulsory vote is conducted in the privacy of the Diary Room. Unlike most other versions of Big Brother, the houseguests may discuss the nomination and eviction process openly and freely. The nominee with the majority of votes will be evicted from the House on the weekly live broadcast, exiting to an adjacent studio to be interviewed by Chen, after which the cycle begins again.
Houseguests may voluntarily leave the house at any time and those who break the rules may be expelled from the house. The last nine evicted houseguests will form the Big Brother jury, and vote for the winner during the season finale. The jury members will be sequestered in a separate house and will not be allowed to watch the show except for competitions and ceremonies that include all of the remaining houseguests; the jury members will not be shown any Diary Room interviews or any footage that may include strategy or details regarding nominations.


=== Twists ===


==== BB Takeover ====
CBS announced the season's twist, BB Takeover, on June 17, 2015, in which a surprise guest was to visit the house each week to reveal a different twist to the HouseGuests. Though it was initially announced that there would be a guest every week, there were no Takeovers after Week 3; in an interview during the season, host Julie Chen stated that the twist had been cancelled because "there was enough going on” with the other elements of the game, though there has yet to be an official announcement made to the HouseGuests about the Takeover's cancellation.


==== Twin Twist ====
As with the fifth season, a pair of twins competed as one, switching every few days between the house and a sequester location off-site; the twins, Liz and Julia, played as Liz, changing places in the Diary Room with approximately 10 minutes to catch each other up. After the twins survived the first five evictions, the twist was revealed and both twins competed separately. Though the twist was not officially revealed to the other HouseGuests before its completion, the twins were allowed to discuss it freely.


== HouseGuests ==

On June 16, 2015, fourteen HouseGuests were announced by CBS, including Audrey Middleton, the first transgender contestant to appear on the American version of Big Brother, professional wrestler and former WWE NXT competitor Austin Matelson, and Vanessa Rousso who, when the season began, ranked among the top five women in poker history in terms of all-time money winnings.
On June 25, during the second part of the two night premiere, The Amazing Race 26 alumni Jackie Ibarra and Jeff Weldon were revealed as the 15th and 16th HouseGuests. It was later revealed that HouseGuest Liz Nolan and her twin sister, Julia, were competing as one for the Twin Twist; after they survived the first five evictions, Liz and Julia began competing separately, increasing the total number of HouseGuests to 17, the most ever in an American season of Big Brother.


== Episodes ==


== Have-Nots ==


== Voting history ==


=== Notes ===
^Note 1 :      These HouseGuests were initially nominated for eviction, but won the Battle of the Block competition and secured immunity for the week. This also meant the HoH who nominated them was dethroned, and subsequently eligible for post-veto nomination.
^Note 2 : Identical twins Liz and Julia took turns playing as a single HouseGuest during the first five weeks, secretly trading places every few days between living inside the house and being in sequester. Both twins pretended to be Liz until they completed this task. Following the Week 5 eviction, Julia was allowed to enter the house under her own identity and both twins were allowed to play for themselves.
^Note 3 :      For volunteering to sit out of the Week 1 Head of Household competitions, Da'Vonne and Vanessa were awarded the BB Fast Forward, which gave them immunity for the week. They were instructed to share the Fast Forward with another HouseGuest each; they chose Liz and Austin, respectively.
^Note 4 :      A telephone appeared in the House; for being the HouseGuest who answered the seventh call, Da'Vonne was awarded the Last Laugh, which allowed her to block three HouseGuests from voting in this week's eviction; she chose Becky, Jackie, and Jeff.
^Note 5 : Audrey was given a penalty vote for eviction after eating normal food while on the mandatory Have-Not slop diet.
^Note 6 : Week 7 was a double eviction week. Following Shelli's eviction, the remaining HouseGuests played a week's worth of game—including HoH and Veto competitions and Nomination, Veto and Eviction ceremonies—during the remainder of the live show, culminating in a second eviction for the week.


== Reception ==


=== Viewing figures ===
^Note 1 : Episode 3 was delayed to 8:06 PM ET due to the PGA Tour golf event running long.
^Note 2 : Episode 6 was up against the 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup Final featuring USA vs. Japan, resulting in a significant decrease in viewership.


== References ==


== External links ==
CBS Official Site