Camila Batmanghelidjh
Camila Batmanghelidjh CBE (/kəˈmɪlə bætmænˈɡɛlɨdʒ/; Persian: کامیلا باتمانقلیچ‎ Kamylā Batmanghelych; born 1963) is an Iranian-born British charity executive and author. She is best known as the founder of Kids Company, a charity which, until its controversial closure in August 2015, worked with inner-city children and young people in the UK.


== Early life ==
Batmanghelidjh was born on 1 January 1963 in Tehran. Her mother was a Belgian Roman Catholic, while her father was the controversial Iranian doctor Fereydoon Batmanghelidj. She was born two and a half months premature and is severely dyslexic.
In 1974 her family emigrated to the United Kingdom, and she attended Sherborne Girls, a fee-paying boarding school in Dorset. She attended the University of Warwick, graduating with a first-class degree in Theatre and Dramatic Arts, before training as a psychotherapist at Regent's University London.


== Place2Be ==
In 1991 Batmanghelidjh established The Place to Be (now Place2Be), a charity working with troubled children in primary schools. She resigned from and left the charity in 1995. Place2Be now reaches 80,000 children, working in 210 schools across the UK.


== Kids Company ==

In 1996, after leaving the Place2Be, Batmanghelidjh founded Kids Company, a charity that provided care to children whose lives had been disrupted by poverty, abuse and trauma. Originally a single drop-in centre in Camberwell, Kids Company's services allegedly reached some 36,000 children, young people and families. However, this is now disputed. The charity operated through a network of street level centres, alternative education centres, therapy houses and with over 40 schools in London and Bristol as well as a performing arts programme in Liverpool.
In July 2015 a report by Newsnight and BuzzFeed revealed that public funding for Kids Company was to be withheld unless Batmanghelidjh was replaced. On 3 July it was reported that Batmanghelidjh would step down as chief executive in the next few months and continue in a "presidential" role.
On 5 August 2015, Kids Company closed its operations less than a week after receiving a government grant of £3,000,000. The charity was given the money against the advice of officials, who had raised concerns about value for money and how it would be spent. The charity had announced that it was closing down because "it is unable to pay its debts as they fall due”.


== Awards and honours ==
In 2009 Batmanghelidjh was named Businesswoman of the Year by the Dods and Scottish Widows Women in Public Life Awards. She has also received Ernst and Young's Social Entrepreneur of the Year award (2006), Third Sector Magazine's Most Admired Chief Executive (2007) and the Centre for Social Justice's lifetime achievement award in 2009. Batmanghelidjh has been awarded honorary degrees and doctorates by several universities including York St John University, the Open University and Nottingham Trent University.
In February 2013, she was named one of the 100 most powerful women in the United Kingdom by Woman's Hour on BBC Radio 4. In the same month, she was appointed an honorary Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) for services to children and young people. In September 2014 she became an Honorary Fellow of UCL.


== Publications ==
Batmanghelidjh, Camila (2007). Shattered Lives. London: Jessica Kingsley. ISBN 1-8431-0603-5. 
Batmanghelidjh, Camila (2013). Mind the Child. London: Particular Books, Penguin Random House. ISBN 1-8461-4655-0. 


== References ==


== External links ==
Interview with biographical information
Kids Company
The Guardian articles referencing Camila Batmanghelidjh
"Colourful character Camila Batmanghelidjh on her unique approach to charity work", The Independent
BBC News profile
Business Woman of the Year Award