Cara Delevingne
Cara Jocelyn Delevingne (/ˈkɑːrə dɛləˈviːn/ KAH-rə del-ə-veen; born 12 August 1992) is an English fashion model, actress, and singer. Born in London in 1992 to Pandora and Charles Delevingne, she signed with Storm Model Management after leaving school in 2009. Delevingne won the "Model of the Year’" award at the British Fashion Awards in 2012 and 2014 and has appeared in shows for houses including Burberry, Mulberry, Dolce & Gabbana, and Jason Wu. She started her acting career with a minor role in the 2012 film adaptation of Anna Karenina. Delevingne played Margo Roth Spiegelman in the romantic mystery film Paper Towns and will co-star as Enchantress in the superhero film Suicide Squad. In addition to modelling and acting, Delevingne also beatboxes, sings, and plays the drums and guitar.


== Early life ==
Delevingne was born in London, the daughter of Pandora Anne Delevingne (née Stevens) and property developer Charles Hamar Delevingne. She attended Francis Holland School for Girls until she was 16, before moving to Bedales School in Hampshire. She has two older sisters, Chloe and model Poppy Delevingne. Her godfather is Condé Nast executive Nicholas Coleridge and her godmother is actress Joan Collins.
Delevingne's maternal grandfather was publishing executive and English Heritage chairman Sir Jocelyn Stevens, the nephew of magazine publisher Sir Edward George Warris Hulton and the grandson of newspaper proprietor Sir Edward Hulton, 1st Baronet. Her maternal grandmother Janie Sheffield was lady-in-waiting to Princess Margaret. Her paternal great-grandfather was the Canadian-born British politician Hamar Greenwood, 1st Viscount Greenwood. Through one of her maternal great-great-grandfathers, Sir Lionel Lawson Faudel Faudel-Phillips, 3rd Baronet, Delevingne descends from the Anglo-Jewish Faudel-Phillips baronets; two of her ancestors on that line served as Lord Mayor of London.


== Career ==


=== Modelling ===

Delevingne first began modelling at age ten in an editorial shot by Bruce Weber for Vogue Italia alongside model Lady Eloise Anson. She signed with Storm Model Management in 2009 after being spotted by Sarah Doukas, the founder of Storm, who had previously discovered Kate Moss.
In 2011, Delevingne was part of Burberry’s spring/summer campaign alongside other young British models including Jourdan Dunn. This was shot on Brighton beach by Mario Testino, which turned out to be the beginning of many shoots she went on to partake in with the 60 year old photographer.
Delevingne’s first catwalk appearance was at the 2011 London Fashion Week, stepping out in the Burberry Prorsum autumn/winter collection. Dunn opened and closed the show with Delevingne appearing sixth. She is currently the face of Burberry's Beauty campaign alongside fellow British models Edie Campbell and Jourdan Dunn.
Delevingne has featured in advertising campaigns for other brands including H&M Authentic Collection (2011), Dominic Jones Jewellery (2012), Blumarine, DKNY, Tom Ford, Yves Saint Laurent, Zara, Chanel. She was described by British Vogue as the "star face" of the autumn/winter 2012–2013 show season, having appeared on the catwalk for brands such as Shiatzy Chen, Moschino, Jason Wu, Oscar de la Renta, Burberry, Dolce & Gabbana, Fendi, Stella McCartney, DSquared², Lanvin, Givenchy and Chanel.
Delevingne has graced the covers of Vogue UK thrice including a supplement cover in 2011, Vogue (Korea, Australia, Brazil, Japan, Portugal), LOVE, i-D, Russh, Jalouse, and Style.com's Spring 2013 issue. In addition, she was the cover girl of W's September 2013 issue. She was a model in the 2012 and 2013 Victoria's Secret fashion shows. She is also the face of Chanel's Resort 2013 campaign along with Dutch model Saskia de Brauw. She also landed the face of DKNY in late 2012. In 2012, and 2014, Delevingne won the "Model of the Year" award at the British Fashion Awards. In January 2015, after her 2013 and 2014 appearances in campaigns she was announced as the new face of Yves Saint Laurent Beauté. On 23 January 2015, Delevingne, was named as the new brand ambassador of Swiss watch brand TAG Heuer.
On 8 June 2015, Delevingne's profile was removed from Storm Model Management's website. It was later confirmed that she had cut ties with her management to focus on her acting career. In July, Delevingne appeared on the cover of American Vogue.


=== Acting ===
Delevingne played her film first role, albeit a non-speaking part, in the 2012 film adaptation of Anna Karenina, as Princess Sorokina, the marriage interest of Count Vronsky, alongside Keira Knightley. In August 2013, Delevingne announced she would be voicing the DJ of the Non-Stop-Pop FM radio station in the video game Grand Theft Auto V, which once released became the fastest-selling entertainment product in history.
In June 2014, Delevingne made her TV debut in the final episode of the third and final series of Playhouse Presents'. This was a series of self-contained TV plays, made by British broadcaster Sky Arts. Delevingne featured as Chloe, opposite veteran British actress Sylvia Syms.

Delevingne went on to play the part of Melanie in the British psychological thriller film The Face of an Angel, accompanied by Daniel Brühl and Kate Beckinsale. The film received mixed reviews but in many, Delevingne was commended for her acting. One such example is The Metro which commented that, "In her [Delevingne's] first major film role, she proves she can act with a sweet and playful on-screen presence. She brings a sense of vitality that is desperately missing from the rest of the film."
On 24 October 2014, she starred in a sketch for an annual 90-minute comedy TV event called The Feeling Nuts Comedy Night, which aired on Channel 4 and was designed to raise awareness of testicular cancer. A month later, she featured in South African Group Die Antwoord's latest music video for their song, Ugly Boy. Then in December 2014, Cara starred in Reincarnation, a short film by Karl Lagerfeld for Chanel alongside Pharrell Williams and Geraldine Chaplin.
In February 2015, Delevingne appeared in ASAP Ferg's music video for his song Dope Walk. Later in May 2015, she was also in Taylor Swift's star studded Bad Blood music video which went onto break Vevo's 24-hour viewing record, with 20.1 million views in its day of release.
Delevingne co-starred in the adaptation of John Green's novel, Paper Towns (2015), as Margo Roth Spiegelman. The film brought in $12,650,140 on the opening weekend in the US, which placed it 6th at the box office. Rotten Tomatoes' critical consensus reads, "Paper Towns isn't as deep or moving as it wants to be, yet it's still earnest, well-acted, and thoughtful enough to earn a place in the hearts of teen filmgoers of all ages." Of Delevingne's performance, Justin Chang of Variety called her “the real find of the film”, suggesting that “on the evidence of her work here, this striking actress is here to stay”.
Delevingne is also set to feature in six upcoming movies, the first of which is Kids in Love, a British coming of age drama. The cast includes many up and coming young actors, with Will Poulter and Alma Jodorowsky as lead roles alongside Sebastian de Souza and Delevingne who plays the role of Viola. She plays Henrietta in the period romance film Tulip Fever. She also plays the role of Kath Talent in the film London Fields, based on the 1989 novel of the same name by Martin Amis. She will play a mermaid in the 2015 fantasy film Pan. In December 2014, it was announced that Delevingne had joined the cast of Suicide Squad, an upcoming superhero movie based off the DC comic book series of the same name. She will be playing the Enchantress, a villainess with magical abilities. The latest announcement is that she will star in the upcoming Luc Besson film, Valerian and the City of a Thousand Planets, an adaptation of the comic book series Valérian and Laureline, which will begin filming in December 2015 and scheduled for a 2017 release.


=== Music ===
Delevingne sings and plays the drums and the guitar. Around the same time Delevingne started out as a model, she wrote and recorded two albums of music under artist manager Simon Fuller and was subsequently offered a record deal. However, she turned the deal down because her name would be changed. In 2013, she recorded an acoustic duet cover version of "Sonnentanz" with British soul and jazz singer/songwriter Will Heard. Delevingne also teamed up with Pharrell Williams to make the song "CC The World" which was used for the short Chanel film Reincarnation in which both Pharrell and Delevingne star. This was released to the public on 1 December 2014.


=== Designing ===
Delevingne has designed two fashion collections for DKNY and Mulberry. Her DKNY capsule collection featured a variety of sporty street style items ranging from beanie hats to leather jackets. DKNY described the collection as "mostly unisex". The collection took approximately two years from the first announcement to when it was released on 15 October 2014.
Delevingne has also designed four collections for Mulberry featuring rucksacks and handbags with many embossed with a 'Made in England' stamp underneath the base, alluding to a tattoo that Cara has under her left foot. The collection also consisted of purses, iPad sleeves, phone covers, zipped pouches, and passport holders. The fourth and latest collection was released 3 June 2015.


== In the media ==
Delevingne was named by the Evening Standard as one of "London's 1,000 Most Influential of 2011", in the category of "Most Invited".
In 2013, Delevingne was the most Googled fashion figure and the most re-blogged model on Tumblr.
In March 2014, she was included in The Sunday Times Magazine "100 Makers of the 21st Century" list of influential British people.
In 2014, Delevingne was ranked 6th on the top earning models list for that year, earning an estimated $3.5 million (£2.25 million).
Delevingne was ranked 13th in the 'Most Desirable Women' category run by AskMen.
Delevingne was ranked 20th in Evening Standard's 'Power 1000' list (2013), "because of her domination of the catwalks at London Fashion Week and her huge social media following."


== Personal life ==
Delevingne identifies as bisexual. In June 2015, Delevingne confirmed she is in a relationship with American musician Annie Clark, who is best known by her stage name St. Vincent.


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Music videos ===


=== Video games ===


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Cara Delevingne on Twitter
Cara Delevingne on Instagram
Cara Delevingne on Tumblr
Cara Delevingne at the Internet Movie Database
Cara Delevingne at the Fashion Model Directory