Carly Fiorina
Cara Carleton "Carly" Fiorina (née Sneed; September 6, 1954) is a former business executive and current Chair of the non-profit philanthropic organization Good360. Starting in 1980, Fiorina rose through the ranks to become an executive at AT&T and its equipment and technology spinoff, Lucent. As chief executive officer of Hewlett-Packard (HP) from 1999 to 2005, she was the first woman to lead a company in the top 20 as ranked by Fortune magazine.
In 2002, Fiorina undertook the biggest high-tech merger in history at the time, with rival computer company Compaq, which made HP the world's largest personal computer manufacturer. Following HP's gain in market share as a result of the 2002 merger, Fiorina laid off thousands of U.S. employees, but by 2004 the number of employees was about the same as the pre-merger total. As of February 9, 2005 HP stock had lost more than half its value, while the overall NASDAQ index had fallen 26 percent owing to turbulence in the tech sector. On that date, the HP board of directors forced Fiorina to resign as chief executive officer and chairman.
After leaving HP, Fiorina served on the boards of several organizations and as an adviser to Republican John McCain's 2008 presidential campaign. She won a three-person race for the Republican nomination for the United States Senate from California in 2010, but lost the general election to incumbent Democratic Senator Barbara Boxer by 10 points.
On May 4, 2015 Fiorina announced her candidacy for the Republican nomination in the 2016 presidential election.


== Early life and education ==
Fiorina was born on September 6, 1954 in Austin, Texas, the daughter of Joseph Tyree Sneed III and Madelon Montross (née Juergens) At the time of her birth, Fiorina's father was a professor at the University of Texas School of Law. She is mainly of English and German ancestry, and was raised Episcopalian.
Fiorina attended Channing School in London. She later attended five different high schools, including one in Ghana, graduating from Charles E. Jordan High School in Durham, North Carolina. At one time she aspired to be a classical pianist. She received a Bachelor of Arts in philosophy and medieval history from Stanford University in 1976. During her summers, she worked as a secretary for Kelly Services. She attended the UCLA School of Law in 1976 but dropped out after one semester and worked as a receptionist for six months at a real estate firm Marcus & Millichap, moving up to a broker position before leaving for Italy, where she taught English.
Fiorina received a Master of Business Administration in marketing from the Robert H. Smith School of Business at the University of Maryland, College Park in 1980. She also obtained a Master of Science in management from the MIT Sloan School of Management under the Sloan Fellows program in 1989.


== Business career ==


=== AT&T and Lucent ===
In 1980, Fiorina joined AT&T as a management trainee and rose to become a senior vice president overseeing the company's hardware and systems division.
In 1995, Fiorina led corporate operations for the spinoff from AT&T of Lucent, reporting to Lucent chief executive Henry B. Schacht. She played a key role in planning and implementing the 1996 initial public offering of stock and company launch strategy. Later in 1996, Fiorina was appointed president of Lucent's consumer products business, reporting to Rich McGinn, president and chief operating officer. In 1997, she was appointed chair of Lucent's consumer communications joint venture with Philips, Philips Consumer Communications. It was dissolved a year later after garnering only a 2% market share in mobile phones and losing $500 million on a revenue of $2.5 billion. Also in 1997, she was named group president for the global service provider business at Lucent, overseeing marketing and sales for the company's largest customer segment.


=== Hewlett-Packard (HP) ===
In July 1999, Hewlett-Packard Company named Fiorina chief executive officer, succeeding Lewis Platt and prevailing over the internal candidate Ann Livermore. Concerning Fiorina's hiring as HP's first woman CEO, Matthew Boyle of Fortune magazine has said that "Carly Fiorina didn't just break the glass ceiling, she obliterated it, as the first woman to lead a FORTUNE 20 company."
Fiorina received a larger signing offer than any of her predecessors, including: $65 million in stock, a $3 million signing bonus, a $1 million annual salary (plus a $1.25–3.75 million annual bonus), $36,000 in mortgage assistance, a relocation allowance, and permission (and encouragement) to use company planes for personal affairs. She became the first woman to lead a Fortune 20 company. Fiorina immediately became a highly visible chief executive and remained so throughout her tenure at the company.

Fiorina proceeded to reorganize HP and merge the part she kept with PC maker Compaq. Although the decision to spin off the company's technical equipment division predated her arrival, one of her first major responsibilities as chief executive was overseeing the separation of the unit into the standalone Agilent Technologies. Fiorina proposed the acquisition of the technology services arm of PricewaterhouseCoopers for almost $14 billion, but withdrew the bid after a lackluster reception from Wall Street. Following the collapse of the dot-com bubble, the PwC consulting arm was acquired by IBM for less than $4 billion. Fiorina instituted three major changes to HP's culture shortly after her arrival: a shift from nurturing employees to demanding financial performance, replacing profit sharing with bonuses awarded if the company met financial expectations, and a reduction in operating units from 83 to 4.
In early September 2001, in the wake of the bursting of the Tech Bubble, Fiorina announced the merger with Compaq, a leading competitor in the industry. Fiorina fought for the merger, and it was implemented despite strong opposition from board member Walter Hewlett (the son of company co-founder William Hewlett) and 49% opposition among HP's shareholders. Hewlett launched a proxy fight against Fiorina's efforts, which failed. The Compaq merger created the world's largest personal computer manufacturer by units shipped.
Applying a realistic view to the effects of globalization, Fiorina was a strong proponent, along with other technology executives, of the expansion of the H-1B visa program. Fiorina responded against protectionism in an editorial in the Wall Street Journal, writing that while "America is the most innovative country," it would not remain so if the country were to "run away from the reality of the global economy." Fiorina said to Congress in 2004: "There is no job that is America's God-given right anymore. We have to compete for jobs as a nation." While Fiorina argued that the only way to "protect U.S. high-tech jobs over the long haul was to become more competitive [in the United States]," her comments prompted "strong reactions" from some technology workers who argued that lower wages outside the United States encouraged the offshoring of American jobs. In the US, 30,000 HP employees were laid off during Fiorina's tenure. In 2004, HP fell dramatically short of its predicted third-quarter earnings, and Fiorina fired three executives during a 5 AM telephone call.
In 2003 Fiorina was named by Fortune Magazine the most powerful woman in business. In 2004, Fiorina was included in the Time 100 ranking of "most influential people in the world today" and named tenth on the Forbes list of The World's 100 Most Powerful Women.
Fiorina frequently clashed with HP's board of directors, and she faced backlash among HP employees and the tech community for her leading role in the demise of HP's egalitarian "The HP Way" work culture and guiding philosophy, which she felt hindered innovation. Because of changes to HP's culture, and requests for voluntary pay cuts to prevent layoffs (subsequently followed by the largest layoffs in HP's history), employee satisfaction surveys at HP—previously among the highest in America—revealed "widespread unhappiness" and distrust, and Fiorina was sometimes booed at company meetings and attacked on HP's electronic bulletin board.
During Fiorina's time as CEO, HP's revenue doubled due to mergers with Compaq and other companies, and the rate of patent filings increased. According to reports, however, the company underperformed by a number of metrics: there were no gains in HP's net income despite a 70% gain in net income of the S&P 500 over this period; the company's debt rose from ~4.25 billion USD to ~6.75 billion USD; and stock price fell by 50%, exceeding declines in the S&P 500 Information Technology Sector index and the NASDAQ. In contrast, stock prices for IBM and Dell fell 27.5% and 3% respectively, during this time period.
The February 7, 2005 issue of Fortune described her merger plan as "failing" and the prognosis as "doubtful".
Business professor Robert Burgelman and former HP executive vice president, Webb McKinney who led HP's post-merger integration team, analyzed the merger and concluded that it was ultimately successful, and asserted that Fiorina's replacement, Mark Hurd, was able to do what his predecessor hadn't, thus making the merger work in HPs advantage. In 2008, former acting CEO of Compaq and Huffington Post business contributor, Ben Rosen, referred to the merger as "The Merger That Worked". Rosen went on to reference pundits trying to discredit Fiorina as corporate leader as "shrill", and stated that "...the merger wasn't the problem; it was the management. All Hewlett-Packard needed was strong management in order to realize the latent potential of the merged company."


==== Resignation ====
In early January 2005, the Hewlett-Packard board of directors discussed with Fiorina a list of issues that the board had regarding the company's performance. The board proposed a plan to shift her authority to HP division heads, which Fiorina resisted. A week after the meeting, the confidential plan was leaked to the Wall Street Journal. Less than a month later, the board brought back Tom Perkins and forced Fiorina to resign as chair and chief executive officer of the company. The company's stock jumped on news of her departure, adding almost three billion dollars to the value of HP in a single day. Many employees celebrated her resignation. Under the company's agreement with Fiorina, which was characterized as a golden parachute by TIME magazine, and Yahoo!, it was reported she had been paid slightly more than $20 million in severance.
Following her resignation from HP, Fiorina was ranked as one of the worst American (or tech) CEOs of all time. In 2008, InfoWorld grouped her with a list of products and ideas as flops, declaring her tenure as CEO of HP to be the sixth worst tech flop of all-time and characterizing her as the "anti-Steve Jobs" for reversing the goodwill of American engineers and alienating existing customers. She has been criticized for changing HP's culture and ending the company's profit-sharing program. Others have defended her business leadership decisions and viewed the Compaq merger as successful over the long term. In 2005, Wharton School of Business professor Michael Useem opined, "Fiorina scored high on leadership style, but she failed to execute strategy".
In 2008, Loren Steffy of The Houston Chronicle suggested that the EDS acquisition after Fiorina's tenure was evidence that her failed plan to acquire part of Pricewaterhouse Coopers was justified. Intel chairman Craig Barrett has spoken in Fiorina's defense, stating, "Carly Fiorina positioned HP for success ... Today, HP is a stronger company because of Carly Fiorina's bold action."
Seven months after her resignation, the merged company had more employees worldwide than both companies together had before the merger.


== Transition of career and public persona ==


=== Biography and autobiography ===
In October 2006, Fiorina released an autobiography, Tough Choices, about her career and her views on issues including what constitutes a leader, how women can thrive in business, and the role technology will continue to play in reshaping the world. The book was released during Fiorina's ongoing battle with greater controversy and a review by NPR Books introduced the work by saying "In one of those acts of serendipity that the publishing industry loves, the current scandal over boardroom spying at Hewlett-Packard has erupted just as its former CEO Carly Fiorina has published her autobiography. The book, called Tough Choices, covers Fiorina's rise and fall as America's most powerful female executive." Her autobiography was a contrast to earlier books about her performance, including Backfire (2003) by Peter Burrows and Perfect Enough: Carly Fiorina and the Reinvention of Hewlett-Packard (2003) by George Anders. A 2003 review by The New York Times of the earlier books said, "Two new books about the deal and its main champion—Hewlett-Packard's chairman and chief executive officer, Carly Fiorina—show that there is much investors can glean immediately from this merger."


=== Other organizational involvement ===
On October 2007, Fiorina signed with the Fox Business Network to become a business commentator on the network.
After resigning from HP, Fiorina was named to several board memberships, including Revolution Health Group and computer security company Cybertrust in 2005, In 2006, she became a member of the board of directors for chip maker Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company (TSMC), but she resigned from that board on November 30, 2009, with the company saying this was "because she planned to devote her full time and energy to US senatorial campaign." She served as a member of the MIT Corporation from 2004-2012. She was a member of the Foundation Board of the World Economic Forum (WEF) in 2005. She is an Honorary Fellow of the London Business School. In July 2012, Governor Bob McDonnell of Virginia appointed her to the James Madison University Board of Visitors.
In April 2012, Fiorina became chair of Good360, a 501(c)(3) nonpartisan nonprofit organization in Alexandria, Virginia, which helps companies donate excess merchandise to charities. As of August 2015, she continues to hold this position.


=== The One Woman Initiative and Opportunity International ===
Fiorina launched the One Woman Initiative (OWI) on the weekend of Mother's Day, May 12, 2008, creating a partnership between the private sector and government agencies including the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and the United States Department of State (DoS). OWI describes itself as "An International Women's Empowerment Fund" which seeks to "support existing initiatives in Muslim majority countries and countries with large Muslim populations" and "focus on key empowerment issues including entrepreneurship, political leadership, and the rule of law." OWI said it would raise funds in order to give grants to achieve these objectives, with contributions managed through a separate section 501(c)(3) designated organization.
In June 2009, USAID announced that OWI grants totaling over $500,000 had been made to grassroots organizations in Azerbaijan, Egypt, India, Pakistan and the Philippines. On February 14, 2013, Opportunity International announced a partnership with Fiorina and OWI provide financial resources, education and training to two million women living in poverty. Fiorina was referred to as Global Ambassador to Opportunity International. On May 4, 2015, Opportunity International announced that Fiorina was resigning from the Board after the announcement of her presidential candidacy.


=== Carly Fiorina Enterprises and Fiorina Foundation ===
San Francisco Chronicle reported that, as of July 2009, she had "never registered her Carly Fiorina Enterprises to conduct business in California, either with the California secretary of state or the clerk of Santa Clara County, where Fiorina lives." The Chronicle reported that "Records also show that her Fiorina Foundation has never registered with the Internal Revenue Service or the state attorney general's charitable trust division, which tax-exempt charities are required to do. The foundation 'enables corporations, spokeswomen entrepreneurs and philanthropists alike to address some of the world's most challenging issues,' according to Fiorina's Web site, carlyfiorina.com."  A spokeswoman commented that "Fiorina and her staff believed the foundation was not required to file with the IRS because it accepted no outside contributions and donated only her personal wealth to worthy causes" and characterized Fiorina Enterprises as "...a nonprofit enterprise that helped Fiorina structure speaking engagements and appearances while providing the public with information about her activities..." However, no incorporation papers had been filed, and Carly Fiorina Enterprises had not filed a fictitious business name record, i.e., a 'doing business as,' or DBA, statement, which "usually is required when a business isn't incorporated."


== Political career ==


=== Republican National Committee fundraising chair and 2008 campaign ===
In 2006, Fiorina worked for Senator John McCain's presidential campaign. In early 2008, she was referred to in media sources as a potential vice presidential candidate, and The New York Times noted that while she did not want to run, she was an executive who could possibly become a candidate for President. On March 7, 2008, Fiorina was named fundraising chair for the Republican National Committee's "Victory" initiative. She was also a "point person" for the McCain campaign on issues related to business and economic affairs. Fiorina's severance package from Hewlett-Packard in 2005 was viewed by some as a political liability during the campaign.
On September 3, 2008, Fiorina addressed the Republican National Convention. Earlier that day, she defended the selection of Sarah Palin as McCain's running mate and said that Palin was being subjected to sexist attacks, a charge she repeated a few days later in response to one of the Saturday Night Live parodies of Sarah Palin.
When asked during a radio interview on September 15, 2008 whether she thought Palin had the experience to run a major company like Hewlett-Packard, Fiorina answered "No, I don't. But that's not what she's running for. Running a corporation is a different set of things." When questioned about her answer, she answered, "I don't think John McCain could run a major corporation." Fiorina further claimed that none of the candidates on either ticket had the experience to run a major corporation. After media coverage of Fiorina's comments, she "disappeared from public view" and planned television appearances were cancelled. Although she continued to chair the party's fundraising committee.
Newsweek believed Fiorina to be an important part of McCain's presidential campaign staff. Political analyst Stuart Rothenberg pointed out Fiorina's downside, as a vice president running mate for McCain, "is rather easy to sketch out" because Fiorina would "become a talking point for Democrats" who would focus on Fiorina's severance package and her management style. Rothenberg concluded that Fiorina was, for Democratic opposition researchers, "like a dream come true". Yale business management professor Jeffrey Sonnenfeld stated that McCain's pick of Fiorina to assist with the McCain presidential campaign showed "a blind spot. . . in the McCain campaign to have elevated her stature and centrality", giving her “street bully” leadership style a platform.


=== Defense Business Board and Central Intelligence Agency ===
Fiorina's performed unpaid service on the Defense Business Board, which looked at staffing issues, among others, at The Pentagon; and two years leading the Central Intelligence Agency's External Advisory Board from 2007 to 2009." Fiorina became chairman, when the board was first created in 2007 by then-CIA director Michael Hayden, during the Presidency of George W. Bush.


=== U.S. Senate candidacy for California, 2010 ===

On November 4, 2009, Fiorina formally announced her candidacy in the 2010 Senate election in a bid to unseat incumbent Barbara Boxer. Fiorina's campaign in the Republican primary for that seat received a number of endorsements, including one from Sarah Palin in the form of a Facebook note. Her campaign ad about Republican rival Tom Campbell featuring a "demon sheep" created international, and negative, publicity. After the ad went viral, the California Democratic Party created a parody of the ad depicting Fiorina herself as a demon sheep.
On June 8, 2010, Fiorina won the Republican primary election for the Senate with over 50 percent of the vote, beating Campbell and State Assemblyman Chuck DeVore.
A Los Angeles Times search of public records indicated Fiorina had failed to vote in most elections. Fiorina responded: "I'm a lifelong registered Republican but I haven't always voted, and I will provide no excuse for it. You know, people die for the right to vote. And there are many, many Californians and Americans who exercise that civic duty on a regular basis. I didn't. Shame on me."
The Los Angeles Times noted that Fiorina had conservative positions on certain social issues. She personally opposed abortion, except in cases of rape, incest, or endangerment of the mother's life. As a private citizen, she stated that she voted for Proposition 8, which defined marriage as a union between one man and one woman. Following an August 4, 2010, federal court ruling that Proposition 8 was unconstitutional, Fiorina expressed disagreement with the ruling, saying that California voters spoke clearly against same-sex unions when a majority approved the proposition in 2008. She stated that she opposed litmus tests for Supreme Court nominations and did not favor a federal "personhood" amendment. Fiorina had called global warming a "serious issue" but claimed that the science surrounding it is inconclusive, saying "I think we should have the courage to examine the science on an ongoing basis." In a campaign ad, Fiorina also likened Boxer's concerns over global warming to worrying about "the weather." Fiorina accepted large contributions from the coal industry as well as Koch Industries. Fiorina opposed the cap and trade legislation supported by Boxer, and thought efforts to control greenhouse gases would cost 3 million jobs and are "massively destructive".
Sarah Palin was set to appear at a GOP fundraiser two weeks ahead of the November 2 election, but neither Meg Whitman nor Fiorina – both big-name Republicans – planned to attend. The prediction was that Palin's primary endorsement would jeopardize her general election candidacy. By October 22, when it became public that Fiorina had loaned $1 million to her campaign, she had contributed $6.5 million to her own race.
Boxer won the general election, defeating Fiorina 52.2% to 42.2%.
Reuters reported that nearly a half million dollars in debt from Fiorina's 2010 campaign remained unpaid until May 2015. Twelve former high-level campaign workers told a reporter stated they would not work for her again and questioned her budgeting of the campaign. Fiorina, according to Reuters, has an estimated wealth of up to $120 million, and did not personally respond to the report. Her campaign remarked that outstanding debts after a campaign are not unusual, and Fiorina's prior campaign debt had been paid in full.


=== Unlocking Potential Project ===
Fiorina launched and developed a political action committee (PAC) known as "Up-Project," which is short for "Unlocking Potential Project," from 2011 to 2014. The stated mission of the organization is "...to engage women with new messages and new messengers by focusing on personal interactions with voters and going beyond the traditional methods of identifying, persuading and turning-out voters…" In November 2014, The Washington Post reported that "Helping Fiorina chart her political future are consultants Frank Sadler, who once worked for Koch Industries, and Stephen DeMaura, a strategist who heads Americans for Job Security, a pro-business advocacy group in Virginia"; which was also confirmed by Newmax Media. The Up-Project website lists Fiorina as chairman.


=== American Conservative Union Foundation and CPAC ===
On October 1, 2013, Chairman Al Cardenas of American Conservative Union (ACU), appointed Fiorina as Chairman of the American Conservative Union Foundation (ACUF). The ACU is a 501(c)4 organization that describes itself as "the oldest and largest grassroots conservative organization in the nation... an umbrella organization harnessing the collective strength of conservative organizations... " Its related foundation, ACUF, is a 501(c)3 and is referred to as "the educational arm of the ACU," which puts on the notable Conservative Political Action Conference annually. Fiorina was designated Co-Chair of CPAC 2014 and continues as Chairman of ACUF, in addition to being Member-at-Large. As co-chair, she made a speech at CPAC in 2014; as well as again on February 26, 2015, when she was expected to announces her candidacy for U.S. President. Fiorina's official announcement was made just months later, on May 4, 2015 by television and promotional video, therein repeating her talking points from CPAC and including an attack on Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton.


=== U.S. presidential campaign, 2016 ===

Fiorina ruled out running for the U.S. Senate in 2016, but refused to rule out running for Governor of California in 2018 or President in 2016. In November 2014, The Washington Post reported that Fiorina was "actively exploring" a run for President. Her business background and status as the only CEO and the only woman in a "sea of suited men" were mentioned as positives, with Republican strategists pointing to her disastrous 2010 Senate campaign, unpaid campaign debt and dismissal from HP as "considerable challenges". In March 2015, Fiorina said on Fox News Sunday that there was a "higher than 90% chance" that she would run for president in 2016.
On May 4, 2015, Fiorina announced her candidacy during an interview on Good Morning America, with George Stephanopoulos. Fiorina entered the race with immediate criticism of Hillary Clinton. It was reported that the GOP sees Fiorina as "the tip of the spear" in its attack of the Clinton campaign because she is uniquely positioned to isolate her criticisms of Clinton from claims of gender bias.
Shortly after Fiorina announced her entry into the 2016 presidential race, in a replay of her 2010 senatorial race, the social media and editorial outlets questioned her tenure as HP's CEO as a basis for her run for President, focusing around US job cuts and offshoring that Fiorina directed during her tenure at HP, contrasting it with the high compensation bonuses she received from the company. Campaign Manager, Sarah Isgur Flores, deflected the job cut criticism saying, Fiorina "worked hard to save as many jobs as possible."
On August 6, Fiorina participated in Fox News's first GOP debate. Failing to qualify for one of the Fox News prime-time debate slots, she was relegated to the debate airing earlier the same day. Fiorina's performance led news sources to conclude she had won the early debate. Following the debate, pundits correctly predicted that her polling numbers would surge. On August 9, Fiorina reported an uptick in fundraising support. In an online poll by NBC and SurveyMonkey on August 10, Fiorina came in fourth of the seventeen Republican contenders with 8% of the sampled Republican primary voters saying they would support her in a primary or a caucus, a gain in support of six points from previous polling data.
The National Review pointed out her foil to Hillary Clinton (also a female presidential candidate), saying "Carly Fiorina is no doubt getting attention because of her unique background, but more and more people are staying to listen because she has something fresh to say", and that "Fiorina also seems to relish the role of being the most pointed critic of Hillary Clinton…. She contrasts her background as a 'problem solver' with Clinton's record as a professional politician." The Nation commented, "With so-called women's issues poised to play an unprecedented role in the upcoming election, Republicans need someone who can troll Hillary Clinton without seeming sexist." While noting she was named "the most powerful woman in business" by Fortune Magazine in 1998, Steve Deace of the Conservative Review stated, "Fiorina is a cross between Carson and Trump. She has some of Carson's inspirational biography, and some of Trump's business acumen/resume."


== Political positions ==


=== Climate change ===
Fiorina has not denied that climate change is caused by human activity. She has, however, expressed skepticism that government can affect the issue. On April 4, 2015, Fiorina spoke out about climate change in her home state of California as well how the state has fared as a result of the 2012–15 North American drought. Addressing the issue she stated, "This is all about politics and policy, and it is liberal environmentalists who have brought us this tragedy" and added, "California is a classic case of liberals being willing to sacrifice other people's lives and livelihoods at the altar of their ideology." She criticized Democratic leadership in that state, as well as the White House, saying, "President Obama goes out to California a little over a year ago, calls it a tragedy of global warming and hands out money to a food bank..."


=== Foreign policy ===
Fiorina condemned the international agreement with Iran on its nuclear program and suggested that she would "walk away" from the deal.
On Russia-U.S. relations and the Ukraine crisis, Fiorina has said that if president, she would "stand up and arm Ukraine" and conduct more aggressive military exercises in the Baltic nations to "send a very clear message to Vladimir Putin."
In a January 2015 discussion with an Iowa political blogger, Fiorina said of the Chinese: "They're not terribly imaginative. They’re not entrepreneurial. They don't innovate. That's why they're stealing our intellectual property."


=== Immigration ===
Fiorina supports a path to citizenship for the children of illegal immigrants, if they graduate from college or serve in the armed forces. She has also stressed the need to improve border security before undertaking comprehensive immigration reform.


=== Economy ===
Fiorina opposed the 2009 federal stimulus act.
Fiorina has said she would cut the pay of federal workers and base their compensation on performance.


=== Regulation ===
Fiorina "generally believes that reducing government regulations helps to spur the economy."
Fiorina has condemned the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, saying in April 2015 that "We should get rid of Dodd-Frank and start again."
Fiorina has inaccurately claimed that not "a single regulation has ever been repealed." Glenn Kessler of the Washington Post "Fact Checker" column gave this statement three out of four Pinocchios, finding that "Important parts of the economy have been deregulated in recent decades. While the repeal of a specific rule is relatively rare, there are certainly examples." Susan E. Dudley, director of the Regulatory Studies Center at George Washington University, said that Fiorina is "generally right that regulations, once issued, are rarely revisited and even more rarely actually repealed".


=== Taxation ===
During her 2010 Senate campaign, Fiorina "called for eliminating the estate tax and capital gains taxes for investments in small businesses, and lowering marginal tax rates."
Fiorina opposes proposals to increase the federal gas tax or state gas taxes in order to fund the Highway Trust Fund, asserting in a February 2015 Wall Street Journal op-ed that "Any gas tax hike, big or small, will harm American families and hurt economic growth."


=== Minimum wage ===
Fiorina opposes the federal minimum wage, saying: "To me, a national minimum wage does not make a lot of sense." Fiorina has asserted that raising the federal minimum wage would "hurt those who are looking for entry-level jobs."


=== Paid maternity leave ===
Fiorina opposes a paid maternity leave requirement by the government and believes that the question should be left up to employers. 


=== Drugs ===
Fiorina said in May 2015 that "drug addiction shouldn't be criminalized" and cited "decriminalizing drug addiction and drug use" as an example of a successful reform.
However, Fiorina opposes legalization of marijuana, saying: "My personal opinion is the legalization of marijuana does not help us" and "the message is real clear to young people if you look at a place like Colorado -- we’ve sent the message that pot is just no big deal. And it's just not true." Fiorina also said, however, that: "I believe in states' rights. I would not as president of the United States enforce federal law in Colorado where Colorado voters have said they want to legalize marijuana."


=== LGBT rights ===
On November 4, 2008, Fiorina voted in favor of Proposition 8. On November 30, 2009, during a Wall Street Journal interview, she noted that she created a strong program of domestic partner benefits while at Hewlett-Packard. During the 2010 United States Senate election in California, Fiorina was endorsed by GOProud, a gay conservative organization. On August 11, 2010, answering a Christian Coalition voter guide, she supported banning same-sex marriage with a Federal Marriage Amendment and opposed enforcing the 1993 law banning homosexuals in the military. On September 2, 2010, during a Senate debate, she stated that marriage is between a man and a woman and supported the Defense of Marriage Act, but supported civil unions and supported repealing Don't Ask Don't Tell. On September 19, 2010, in a Faith2Action survey, she opposed the Employment Non-Discrimination Act.
On March 17, 2013, on ABC News, Fiorina said "I think we have to be careful, because John Boehner's views, which are different from Rob Portman's views, are equally sincere. And I think when we get into trouble on this debate when we assume that people who support gay marriage are open and compassion and people who don't are not. It's why I believe the right way to solve these very personal issues is to let people vote on them, don't have judges decide it, don't even have representative government decide it, let people vote on it in the states. I think people of both points of view, accept the democratic process. What they don't always accept is a bunch of self-important, self-appointed judges saying this is culturally the new norm."
On April 1, 2015, Fiorina defended the Religious Freedom Restoration Act and government benefits to same-sex couples. She stated that the Indiana bill is about the "opportunity to practice their religions freely" and "It has not and has never been a license to discriminate." On April 2, 2015, in an interview with USA Today, she described it as "shameful" how, in her view, liberals have fanned the furor over the Indiana law. "I honestly believe this is a set of liberal political activists who practice a game of identity politics and divisive politics to whip people into a frenzy, and I think it's very destructive to the fabric of this country," she said. She blasted business leaders in Silicon Valley and elsewhere who have criticized the Indiana law as discriminatory, questioning why there isn't similar outrage "in the Twitterverse about the subjugation of the rights of women and gays in many countries in which these companies do business. Where is the outrage about that? Where is the outrage about how gays are treated in Iran, for example? Where is the outrage about how women are treated in Algeria?"
On April 3, 2015, in an interview with ABC News, she stated that “I think it's really too bad, honestly, that CEOs are being pressured [...] What this law basically says is that a person can push back against ... either federal government mandate or state government mandate to exert their religious liberties.
On May 7, 2015, during a Dallas County, Texas Republican event, Fiorina told the Iowa-based, conservative Christian website Caffeinated Thoughts she had reversed her position on a Federal Constitutional amendment banning same-sex marriage and now opposes such a measure. She stated, “I think the Supreme Court ruling will become the law of the land, and however much I may agree or disagree with it, I wouldn’t support an amendment to reverse it.” She also stated that "government shouldn’t discriminate on how it provides benefits and that people have a right to their religious views and those views need to be protected.”
On June 26, 2015, Fiorina, said the US Supreme Court decision should have been left up to the states, saying the ruling is "only the latest example of an activist Court. I do not agree that the Court can or should redefine marriage. I believe that responsibility should have remained with states and voters where this conversation has continued in churches, town halls and living rooms around the country". She has not taken a position yet on whether the issue of same-sex marriage is settled law.


== Personal life ==
Fiorina (then Cara Carleton Sneed) married Todd Bartlem, a Stanford classmate, in June 1977. They divorced in 1984. In 1985, she married AT&T executive Frank Fiorina. It was the second marriage for each. They wanted to have children together but, as Fiorina put it: "That wasn't God's plan." She helped raise his two daughters Traci and Lori Ann. Lori Ann struggled with alcoholism, substance abuse and bulimia. She died in 2009 at age 35. Fiorina and her husband live in Mason Neck, Virginia.
On February 20, 2009, Fiorina was diagnosed with breast cancer. She underwent a double mastectomy at Stanford Hospital on March 2, 2009, followed by chemotherapy, which caused her to temporarily lose her hair, and later radiation therapy. She was given "an excellent prognosis for a full recovery." Early in her campaign for the United States Senate seat held by Barbara Boxer, Fiorina humorously told a group of supporters: "I have to say that after chemotherapy, Barbara Boxer just isn't that scary anymore."


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Fiorina, Carly. Tough Choices: A Memoir. Portfolio Hardcover, 2006. (hardcover: ISBN 1-59184-133-X, abridged audiobook: ISBN 0-14-305907-6)
Anders, George. Perfect Enough: Carly Fiorina and the Reinvention of Hewlett-Packard. New York: Penguin Group, 2003. ISBN 1-59184-003-1.
Burrows, Peter. Backfire: Carly Fiorina's High-Stakes Battle for the Soul of Hewlett-Packard. Wiley, 2003. ISBN 0-471-26765-1.


== External links ==
Carly for President – official website
Profile at Project Vote Smart
Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission
Campaign contributions at OpenSecrets.org
Carly Fiorina at the Notable Names Database
Appearances on C-SPAN