Cecil (lion)
Cecil was a 13-year-old male Southwest African lion (Panthera leo bleyenberghi) who primarily lived in the Hwange National Park in Matabeleland North, Zimbabwe. He was a major attraction at the park and was being studied and tracked by the University of Oxford as part of a larger study.
Cecil was wounded with an arrow by Walter Palmer, an American recreational big-game hunter, was then tracked, and on 1 July 2015, approximately 40 hours later, killed with a rifle. The killing drew international media attention and sparked outrage among animal conservationists, politicians and celebrities, as well as a strong negative response against Palmer. Two other men are being prosecuted in relation to the hunt, and the Zimbabwean government has stated it will seek Palmer's extradition.


== Background ==

Cecil—named after Cecil Rhodes—and another lion believed to be Cecil's brother were noticed in Hwange National Park in 2008. In 2009, Cecil and his brother encountered an established pride, which resulted in a fight in which Cecil's brother was killed and both Cecil and the leader of the pride were seriously wounded; the leader was subsequently killed by park rangers because of the wounds he had received in the fight with Cecil. Cecil retreated to another part of the park where he eventually established his own pride which had up to 22 members. In 2013, Cecil was forced out from the area by two young male lions into the eastern border of the park. There, he created a coalition with another male lion named Jericho to establish two prides which consisted of Cecil, Jericho, half a dozen females and up to a dozen cubs sired by Cecil or Jericho.
Cecil was the best-known animal in the national park and was identifiable by his black-fringed mane and a GPS tracking collar. The lions in the park, including Cecil, have been studied by scientists from the Wildlife Conservation Research Unit at Oxford University as part of a scientific project that has run since 1999, and his movements had been followed since 2008. Of the 62 lions tagged during the study period, 34 have died. One of the researchers on the project suggested that Cecil had become so popular because he was accustomed to people, allowing vehicles sometimes as close as 10 metres (33 ft), making it easy for tourists and researchers to photograph and observe him.
It is estimated there are between 25,000 and 30,000 lions alive in Africa. In 2013, 49 hunted lion carcasses were exported from Zimbabwe as trophies; the 2005-2008 Zimbabwe hunt "off-take" (licensed kills) average was 42 lions per year.


== Death ==
In June 2015, Walter Palmer, an American dentist and recreational game hunter from Minnesota, reportedly paid US$50,000 to a professional hunter / guide, Theo Bronkhorst, to enable him to kill a lion. Cecil was allegedly lured out of the sanctuary where he was shot and wounded with an arrow. He was tracked, and approximately 40 hours later was killed with a rifle. He was then skinned and his head was removed. When his headless skeleton was found by park investigators, his tracking collar was missing.
Zimbabwe National Parks have stated that neither Bronkhorst nor the landowner, Honest Ndlovu, on whose property Cecil was believed to have been shot, had the appropriate permit for a lion. On 31 July 2015, Agence France Presse AFP reported that the Zimbabwean hunt guide, Bronkhorst, declared: "We had obtained the permit for bow hunting, we had obtained the permit for the lion from the council." The two Zimbabweans were arrested by Zimbabwe police and accused of assisting Palmer in the killing. Palmer had already returned to the United States, where he issued a statement that he had "relied on the expertise of my local professional guides to ensure a legal hunt" and "deeply regret that my pursuit of an activity I love and practice responsibly and legally resulted in the taking of this lion". On 28 July, The Daily Telegraph reported that "independent sources" had "seen a copy of the relevant hunting permit".


== Reactions to killing ==


=== Overseas ===
Cecil's killing created an outrage among animal conservationists, prompted responses from politicians and many other people. A number of celebrities publicly condemned Cecil's killing. Palmer received a flood of hate messages, and activists posted the dentist's private details online. The words "Lion Killer" were also spray-painted on the garage door at Palmer's Florida vacation home.
The killing of Cecil sparked a discussion among conservation organisations about the ethics and business of big-game hunting and a proposal for bills banning imports of lion trophies to the U.S. and European Union. These discussions have convinced three of the largest airlines in the U.S., American, Delta and United, to take the voluntary step of banning the transport of hunting trophies. Activists have also called on African countries to ban bow hunting, lion baiting, and hunting from hunting blinds. Global media and social media reaction has resulted in close to 1.2 million people signing online petition "Justice for Cecil", which calls on Zimbabwe's government to stop issuing hunting permits for endangered animals.
Safari Club International responded by suspending both Palmer's and Bronkhorst's memberships, stating that "those who intentionally take wildlife illegally should be prosecuted and punished to the maximum extent allowed by law." Late-night talk-show host Jimmy Kimmel helped raise US$150,000 in donations in less than 24 hours to Oxford's Wildlife Conservation Research Unit, which had been "responsible for tracking Cecil's activity and location".


=== In Zimbabwe ===
Cecil's killing went largely unnoticed in the animal's native Zimbabwe. The country's The Chronicle newspaper wrote: "It is not an overstatement that almost 99.99 percent of Zimbabweans didn’t know about this animal until Monday. Now we have just learnt, thanks to the British media, that we had Africa’s most famous lion all along, an icon!" The BBC's Farai Sevenzo wrote: "The lion's death has not registered much with the locals". At the same time, Zimbabwean officials stated that the killing of Cecil had already caused a drop in tourism revenues. A significant drop was noted in Hwange, where the lion had lived. Many international tourists, who had planned to see the lion, had cancelled their trips. "This killing is a huge loss to our tourism sector that was contributing immensely to the national wealth", said Emanuel Fundira, the president of the Safari Operators Association of Zimbabwe. "We had a lot of people, in terms of visitors, coming in to the country to enjoy and view Cecil, so really this was a great loss," Fundira said, and that Cecil's presence was "a draw card," and compared his death to "the demise of an icon." The head of the Zimbabwe Tourism Authority, Karikoga Kaseke, said that tourism had been booming, but that Zimbabwe was now perceived as a country which was not interested in protecting and promoting animal rights, and this had also had a negative impact on the tourism sector.
Bryan Orford, a professional wildlife guide who worked in Hwange, calculates that with tourists from a single nearby lodge collectively paying US$9,800 per day, the revenue generated by having Cecil's photograph taken over five days would have been greater than someone paying a one-off fee of US$45,000 to hunt and kill the lion, with no hope of future revenue.
On 1 August 2015, in response to Cecil's killing, the hunting of lions, leopards and elephants along with all bow-hunting was immediately suspended in areas outside of Hwange National Park by Zimbabwe's environment minister, Honorable Oppah Muchinguri. "All such hunts will only be conducted if confirmed and authorised in writing by the Director-general of the Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife Management Authority, and only if accompanied by parks staff whose costs will be met by the landowner", the minister confirmed in a statement to the press. NBC News reported that "just 10 days after the moratorium was imposed, the Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife Management Authority said it had been be [sic] axed across most of that area."


=== Government officials ===
Some high-level government officials publicly condemned the killing of Cecil. David Cameron, the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, told reporters that the United Kingdom plays "a leading role in preventing illegal wildlife trade", when he was asked about Cecil's death. His Africa Minister, Grant Shapps, described the incident as "barbaric hunting".
U.S. Congresswoman Betty McCollum, co-chair of the United States Congressional International Conservation Caucus, called for an investigation of Palmer and the killing.
U.S. Senator Bob Menendez introduced the Conserving Ecosystems by Ceasing the Importation of Large (CECIL) Animal Trophies Act, which "extend[s] the import and export protections for a species listed under the Endangered Species Act to those that have been proposed for listing, thereby prohibiting the import of any trophies gleaned from Cecil’s killing without explicitly obtaining a permit from the Secretary of the Interior." The bill was cosponsored by Senators Cory Booker, Richard Blumenthal, and Ben Cardin.
On 30 July 2015, the United Nations General Assembly adopted a non-binding resolution to strengthen the efforts to address illicit wildlife poaching and trafficking. Germany and Gabon were the sponsors of the resolution. Harald Braun, Germany's U.N. Ambassador, linked the resolution to the killing and said: "Like most people in the world we are outraged at what happened to this poor lion." Gabon's Foreign Minister Emmanuel Issoze-Ngondet said that Cecil's killing was "a matter of deep concern for all countries in Africa".
Zimbabwe's acting information minister, Prisca Mupfumira, when questioned about Cecil's killing, asked, "What lion?"
At a press conference on 31 July 2015, Zimbabwe’s environment minister, Opa Muchinguri, said the hunter broke Zimbabwean law and needs to be held accountable. “We are appealing to the responsible authorities for his extradition to Zimbabwe". Muchinguri said in a press release that Palmer's actions had tarnished the image of Zimbabwe and placed further strain on the relationship between Zimbabwe and the U.S. She called on all conservationists and animal lovers to provide resources to help tackle poaching and other environmental concerns in Zimbabwe.
South African President Jacob Zuma declared on 11 August 2015: “What it sounds like from a distance [is] that the hunter did not know that Cecil was so popular, just saw a lion, and killed a lion, and it’s Cecil, and Cecil is very well loved and it caused a problem, because everyone wants to go and see Cecil. I think it’s just an incident." A video of his statement was also released.


=== Criminal investigations ===
On 7 July 2015 law enforcement officers of the Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife Management Authority commenced an investigation after receiving information that a lion had been illegally killed on a farm near Hwange National Park. The investigation discovered that a lion had been illegally killed on the farm on 1 July 2015.
On 29 July 2015 Theo Bronkhorst appeared in court at Victoria Falls and was charged with poaching offences for not having the required hunting permit. He was granted bail at US$1,000 and was ordered to appear back in court on 5 August. Bronkhorst stated: "Palmer is a totally innocent party to this whole thing, and he has conducted and bought a hunt from me that was legitimate." Separately, Ndlovu was charged with allowing an illegal hunt on his land. Zimbabwe National Parks spokespersons explained that lion hunting using firearms is legal, but it requires a permit and a quota which is assigned to a given area. However, this killing was illegal because it took place in an area that does not have a quota for lion kills. On 5 August 2015, Bronkhorst reappeared before magistrates charged with failing to prevent an illegal hunt. The case was adjourned until 28 September when Bronkhorst's barrister was next available.
eNCA, the 1st African 24-hour news service, reported on 13 August 2013 that "Police have still not managed to craft charges to put to a third man, Honest Ndlovu." Along the same lines, Reuters reported on 4 August that Ndlovu "was not charged and parks officials said he would first testify for the state and be charged later." In the same vein, the Washington Post reported on 31 July 2015 that Ndlovu's "lawyer told the AP that Ndlovu has not been charged and was released."
Walter Palmer left Zimbabwe for the United States after the hunt. He expressed deep regret for the killing, maintaining that he had relied on the expertise of the local professional guides to ensure that the hunt was legal. He indicated that he would cooperate with authorities in the investigation. On 30 July 2015, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service was looking for Palmer as part of its investigation. He contacted them voluntarily through a representative on the same day. On 31 July 2015, Zimbabwe officials said they had initiated legal proceedings to extradite Palmer from the United States to face a charge, claiming that Palmer "had a well-orchestrated agenda which would tarnish the image of Zimbabwe".


== Consequences for the pride ==
When one or more new male lions oust or replace a previous male(s) associated with a pride, they often kill any existing young cubs, a form of infanticide. Initially, both the Oxford University study and Johnny Rodrigues, head of the Zimbabwe Conservation Task Force, indicated that they believed Cecil's six cubs could be killed by the new dominant male in the pride. In a later interview, however, Rodrigues said Jericho had taken over the pride but had not killed Cecil's cubs, and that he was also keeping the cubs safe from any rival males.
On 9 August 2015, The Telegraph reported that one of Cecil's cubs had been killed by a rival male who had been trying to mate with the cub's mother.


== See also ==
Big five game
Game law
International Anti-Poaching Foundation


== References ==


== External links ==
Cecil - Africa's Biggest Lion on YouTube. Uploaded by YouTube user Pamela Robinson on September 14, 2014.
Orford, Brian. "Cecil the lion at Zimbabwe's Hwange national park – archive video footage". theguardian.com. Retrieved 2 August 2015.