Deadpool (film)
Deadpool is an upcoming American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character of the same name. It is intended to be the eighth installment in the X-Men film series. The film was directed by Tim Miller, with a screenplay by Rhett Reese and Paul Wernick, and stars Ryan Reynolds, Morena Baccarin, Ed Skrein, T. J. Miller, Gina Carano, Brianna Hildebrand, Andre Tricoteux, and Leslie Uggams. In Deadpool, after being subjected to an experiment which leaves Wade Wilson with new abilities, Wilson hunts down the man who nearly destroyed his life.
In February 2004, development for the film began with New Line Cinema. However, in March 2005, New Line Cinema put the film in turnaround and 20th Century Fox became interested. In May 2009, 20th Century Fox lent the film to writers, and in April 2011, Miller was hired to direct. Principal photography commenced in Vancouver, Canada, in March 2015 and ended in May.
Deadpool is scheduled for release on February 12, 2016, in North America.


== Premise ==
In an effort to cure his cancer, former special forces operative Wade Wilson was subjected to an experiment that leaves him with accelerated healing powers, disfigured skin, and a "dark, twisted" sense of humor. Armed with new abilities and a new identity, Wilson hunts down the man who nearly destroyed his life.


== Cast ==
Ryan Reynolds as Wade Wilson / Deadpool: A disfigured and unstable Canadian mercenary who was once subjected to an experiment that had hoped to cure his cancer by receiving a regenerative healing factor, which had ended in a disastrous result.
Morena Baccarin as Vanessa
Ed Skrein as Ajax
T. J. Miller as Jack Hammer / Weasel
Gina Carano as Angel Dust
Brianna Hildebrand as Negasonic Teenage Warhead
Andre Tricoteux as Piotr Rasputin / Colossus: A mutant with the ability to transform his skin into an organic steel. The role was originally offered to Daniel Cudmore, who had played the character in X2, X-Men: The Last Stand and X-Men: Days of Future Past, but he declined the offer.
Leslie Uggams as Blind Al
Jed Rees as The Recruiter
Marvel Comics co-creator Stan Lee will have a cameo appearance as a strip club MC. Deadpool co-creator Rob Liefeld will also make a cameo appearance.


== Production ==


=== Development ===

In May 2000, Artisan Entertainment announced a deal with Marvel Entertainment to coproduce, finance and distribute a film based on Deadpool. In February 2004, New Line Cinema attempted to produce a Deadpool film with writer/director David S. Goyer working on the spin-off and actor Ryan Reynolds in the title role. However, by August, Goyer lost interest in favor of other projects. In March 2005, 20th Century Fox became interested in moving forward on production for Deadpool after New Line Cinema put the project in turnaround. The studio considered the Deadpool spin-off early in the development of X-Men Origins: Wolverine, with Reynolds being cast for the role. After the opening weekend success of X-Men Origins: Wolverine, the studio announced that it was lending Deadpool out to writers with Donner acting as a producer. Donner said that she wants the film to ignore the Deadpool of X-Men Origins: Wolverine and reboot the character. She also stated that Deadpool will have the attributes that the character has in the comics, such as breaking the fourth wall. Rhett Reese and Paul Wernick were hired to write the script in January 2010. Robert Rodriguez was sent an early draft of the screenplay in June 2010. After negotiations with Rodriguez fell through, Adam Berg emerged as a top contender to direct. In April 2011, visual effects specialist Tim Miller was hired as director. On July 28, 2014, visual effects test footage created for the film in 2012 and featuring Ryan Reynolds by voice and motion capture, was leaked online. The following day, the test footage was officially released online by Blur Studio, the company who created the test footage. In September 2014, due to the positive response of the test footage, the film was given a release date of February 12, 2016.
In October 2014, producer Simon Kinberg said that the film would be part of the shared cinematic universe with the other X-Men films. Marvel characters Cannonball and Garrison Kane were deleted from subsequent rewrites of the script, with the latter specifically being omitted due to budgetary concerns over the required CGI for his cybernetic arms.


=== Casting ===
In December 2014, Reynolds was confirmed to reprise his role as Wade Wilson / Deadpool. In January 2015, T. J. Miller and Ed Skrein were in talks to appear in the film. In February 2015, Gina Carano was cast as Angel Dust, and Miller and Morena Baccarin were cast in unspecified roles. Taylor Schilling, Crystal Reed, Rebecca Rittenhouse, Sarah Greene, and Jessica De Gouw were also considered for Baccarin's role. In March, Miller's role was revealed to be Weasel, while Baccarin's was revealed to be Vanessa. Later that month, Brianna Hildebrand was hired to play Negasonic Teenage Warhead. In April, Skrein revealed his role as Ajax. In July, Leslie Uggams confirmed she will be portraying Blind Al. In August, Tim Miller revealed that Jed Rees will portray The Recruiter. Daniel Cudmore declined the offer to reprise his role as Colossus from the previous X-Men films, resulting in Andre Tricoteux being cast in that role.


=== Filming ===
Principal photography commenced on March 23, 2015, in Vancouver, Canada, and ended on May 29, 2015.


== Release ==
Deadpool is scheduled for release on February 12, 2016.


=== Marketing ===
In July 2015, Miller and cast members Reynolds, Baccarin, Miller, Hildebrand, Skrein, and Carano attended the 2015 San Diego Comic-Con International to present the trailer of the film. The trailer was positively received by attendees, who gave the trailer a standing ovation and requested that it be played an additional time. Graeme McMillan of The Hollywood Reporter opined that Deadpool "looks like the first movie that talks to the fan audience in their own language", and praised the meta humor of the trailer. Joshua Rivera of Business Insider praised the trailer for being "remarkably faithful to the source material", as well as for its humor and action.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Arrant, Chris (March 27, 2015). "DEADPOOL Movie Logo & Synopsis Revealed". Newsarama. Retrieved March 27, 2015. 
Williams, Owen (August 5, 2015). Exclusive Deadpool Trailer Breakdown. Empire. 


== External links ==
Official website
Deadpool at the Internet Movie Database
Deadpool at Box Office Mojo
Deadpool at Metacritic
Deadpool at Rotten Tomatoes