Descendants (2015 film)
Disney's Descendants is a 2015 American musical fantasy television film directed by Kenny Ortega. It stars Dove Cameron, Cameron Boyce, Booboo Stewart, Sofia Carson as modernized depictions of the teenage children based on the villains featured in Walt Disney Studios' animated film franchise. The film debuted on July 31, 2015 as Disney Channel Original Movie to positive reviews.


== Plot ==
King Beast (Dan Payne) and Queen Belle (Keegan Connor Tracy) marry, unite the Disney kingdoms into the United States of Auradon, and are elected the leaders of the new idyllic kingdom. All the villains, sidekicks, and accomplices are forced after their defeat to live imprisoned on the Isle of the Lost, a forbidden island surrounded by a barrier that also inhibits magic.
In present day Auradon, Prince Ben (Mitchell Hope), the teenage son of King Beast and Queen Belle, is about to ascend the throne. His first official proclamation offers a chance at redemption to selected trouble-making teenage children of villains from the Isle of the Lost ("Rotten to the Core"): Carlos (Cameron Boyce), son of Cruella de Vil; Jay (Booboo Stewart), son of Jafar; Evie (Sofia Carson), daughter of the Evil Queen; and Mal (Dove Cameron), daughter of Maleficent. These villainous descendants are allowed into Auradon to attend a prep school alongside the teenage children of iconic Disney heroes. However, the evil teens are under pressure by their parents to help all the villains regain power by stealing the Fairy Godmother's magic wand.
Mal, Evie, Jay and Carlos arrive at Auradon Prep and set out to steal the wand using Evie's magic mirror to locate the wand at a nearby museum. There, after seeing statues of Maleficent, Jafar, the Evil Queen and Cruella de Vil, Mal begins questioning about being good and evil ("Evil Like Me"). Ultimately, the villain kids fail to retrieve the wand after Jay accidentally sets off the alarm and they escape.
On their first day, Jay is recruited for the school's tourney sports team. Carlos realizes dogs are not dangerous and befriends the school's mutt. Evie becomes infatuated with Chad Charming (Jedidiah Goodacre), son of Cinderella and Prince Charming, who takes advantage of her by making her do his homework. Mal befriends Jane (Brenna D'Amico), daughter of the Fairy Godmother. Mal exploits Jane's insecurity in her own appearance to her personal advantage by pretending to befriend Jane and even using some magic to change Jane's hair making her look more beautiful. After hearing about Jane's hair change, Mulan's daughter, Lonnie (Dianne Doan), and other girls' ask Mal to change their hair too.
Evie learns the Fairy Godmother will use the wand at Prince Ben's coronation ceremony and the entire school, including the villain kids, are invited. Ben visits and Mal asks him if she could be seated closer to the wand during the ceremony. Ben replies that only he, his family and girlfriend, Audrey—daughter of Aurora and Prince Phillip—will be allowed to be seated up front. Mal hatches a plan to become Ben's girlfriend in order to get the wand. While making a love spell in the form of a cookie, the group realizes the spell needs a human tear of true sadness for the love spell to be successful. Lonnie interrupts the group and reminiscences about the love she felt when her mother made cookies to make her feel better. She sheds a tear out of sadness when she learns that the villain kids have never known love—even from their own parents. Mal quickly snatches the tear and adds it to the cookie dough.
Mal gives Ben the cookie and the love spell begins to take effect. Jay, Carlos, and Ben work together to win the tourney game and Jay is named MVP. Ben declares his love for Mal in a song ("Did I Mention") and asks her to the coronation, angering Audrey and causing her to go with Chad, which in turn upsets Evie.
Chad has Evie's magic mirror taken away and Evie is forced to take a test without its aid. Evie gets a 'B' on the test proving she is intelligent without needing the help of her mirror and she tells Doug (Zachary Gibson), son of Dopey, who believed in her. Ben asks Mal on a date and Evie helps her get ready. While on the date, Mal and Ben get to know each other. Ben decides to go for a swim but Mal declines to join him. Mal begins to question whether she really does have feelings for Ben ("If Only"). When Mal doesn't see Ben surface from the lake she jumps into the lake to find him, but she can't swim and when she starts thrashing around in the water, Ben helps her get out. Ben asks Mal if she reciprocates his feelings of love and she replies by saying that she doesn't know what love feels like. Ben says that maybe he can teach her.
The villain kids video chat with their parents for Auradon Prep's Parents' Day because the villains are not allowed to leave the island. At Parents' Day, Ben introduces Mal to his parents as his new girlfriend, much to their reluctance and shock. There, Aurora's mother—Audrey's grandmother—blames Mal about Maleficent's actions and Chad also adds to the scorn. Evie sprays Chad with a sleeping potion Mal had given her and he collapses. The villain kids leave the lunch and King Beast blames Ben for the turn of events. After the lunch, the other students, now including Jane, mock the villain kids angering Mal to undo Jane's hair and threatening to do the same to the other girls. The group reluctantly plan to steal the wand.
The day of the coronation arrives and Mal gives Ben a brownie with the anti-love spell. He reveals he knew all along because the spell was broken during their first date when he swam in the Enchanted Lake, which washed away the spell. In panic, Mal asks if he had been faking his feelings for her since then, but he tells her that his feelings are genuine as he entrusts her with his signet ring. Ben believes Mal gave him the love spell because she had a crush on him.
During the coronation ceremony, Mal contemplates whether she should get the wand for her mother, or be the better person Ben expects her to be. Suddenly, the wand is snatched up by Jane who wants to use it to give herself the magical makeover her mother won't allow. Unable to control the magic, Jane accidentally breaks the barrier around the Isle of the Lost. Sensing the barrier now gone, Maleficent takes her staff and magically flies away in dark smoke. Mal manages to pry the wand from Jane to fulfill her mother's wishes, but Ben convinces Mal she is good and that she and her friends should follow their hearts, not their parents' evil ways. Returning the wand to Fairy Godmother, Mal admits she loves her friends and wishes to stay at the school to be with Ben because it makes her happy. Maleficent arrives, renders everyone at the coronation still except for her and the villain kids, angrily saying Mal failed them, and takes the wand from the frozen Fairy Godmother. Mal tries to convince her mom to stop, but Maleficent turns into an enormous dragon and attacks them. Mal uses a spell and defeats Maleficent by shrinking her down to a small lizard, equivalent to amount of the love in her heart. Everyone unfreezes and the villain kids resolve to be good. In the end, the whole cast sing and dance at the coronation after-party ("Set It Off"). But Mal gives the audience a sly smile and hints that it is not the end of the story.


== Cast ==


=== The Descendants ===
Dove Cameron as Mal, daughter of Maleficent
Cameron Boyce as Carlos, son of Cruella de Vil
Booboo Stewart as Jay, son of Jafar
Sofia Carson as Evie, daughter of The Evil Queen
Mitchell Hope as Prince Ben, son of Queen Belle and King Beast
Sarah Jeffery as Princess Audrey, daughter of Aurora and Prince Phillip
Jedidiah Goodacre as Prince Chad Charming, son of Cinderella and Prince Charming
Dianne Doan as Lonnie, daughter of Fa Mulan and Li Shang
Brenna D'Amico as Jane, daughter of the Fairy Godmother
Zachary Gibson as Doug, son of Dopey


=== The Villains ===
Kristin Chenoweth as Maleficent from Sleeping Beauty, Mal's mother, the leader of the villains, and the main antagonist.
Wendy Raquel Robinson as Cruella de Vil from One Hundred and One Dalmatians, and Carlos's mother.
Maz Jobrani as Jafar from Aladdin, and Jay's father.
Kathy Najimy as The Evil Queen from Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, and Evie's mother.


=== The Heroes ===
Keegan Connor Tracy as Queen Belle, from Beauty and the Beast
Dan Payne as King Beast, from Beauty and the Beast
Melanie Paxson as the Fairy Godmother, from Cinderella
Stephanie Bennett as Snow White, from Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs
Judith Maxie as Queen Leah, from Sleeping Beauty


== Production ==
On December 12, 2013, Disney Channel announced the production of the film and released the plot outline. The script was written by the Emmy Award-nominated Josann McGibbon and Sara Parriott. Filming began in the spring of 2014. Kenny Ortega, the Emmy Award-winning director who has previously worked with Disney Channel on the High School Musical trilogy, was announced to be directing the film.
Melissa de la Cruz wrote the film's prequel novel The Isle of the Lost, which was released on May 5, 2015.


== Animated spinoff ==
Right after the film finished airing on Disney Channel, it was announced that a CGI-animated spinoff entitled Descendants: Wicked World would be released in September 2015. Furthermore, former Phineas and Ferb storyboard artist Aliki Theofilopoulos Grafft announced on Twitter that she was directing the series, with Jenni Cook as producer, and that the original cast would be reprising their roles.


== Soundtrack ==
Initially, the film was not envisioned as a musical. It was not until director/choreographer Kenny Ortega came onboard that songs were added. The film itself contains seven musical numbers, plus a song by Shawn Mendes during the end credits, which was released as a single. In addition, the soundtrack album includes four bonus tracks as well as a suite of the David Lawrence's orchestral score. Not included on the soundtrack is the Vancouver Children's Choir Choral Society's interpretation of "Laudamus te" from Antonio Vivaldi's Gloria, which was heard at Prince Ben's coronation ceremony.
The soundtrack debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard 200 with 42,000 equivalent album units earned during its first week of release. It is the smallest weekly total for a No. 1 album since the chart began ranking albums by equivalent units in December 2014. Additionally, the 30,000 pure album sales is the lowest ever total for a No. 1 album in the SoundScan era, which began in 1991. It also dethroned R&B singer Jill Scott's Woman from its debut at No. 1, with only 27,000 units sold after. It is the first Disney Channel Original Movie since High School Musical 2 to have a soundtrack hit No. 1 on the Billboard 200.


=== Track listing ===


=== Charts ===


=== Charted songs ===
"Rotten to the Core", performed by Dove Cameron, Cameron Boyce, Booboo Stewart & Sofia Carson, debuted at number 38 on the US Billboard Hot 100.
"If Only", performed by Dove Cameron debuted at number 99 on the US Billboard Hot 100.


== Reception ==


=== Ratings ===
Before the film made its TV debut, it was viewed more than one million times on the Watch Disney Channel app. It was viewed by 6.6 million people on its premiere night and 10.5 million viewers in Early DVR Playback.


=== Critical reception ===
The film has received positive reviews from critics. Isabella Biedenharn of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a "B" grade, saying "...plot isn't really the point. The fun is in the roll call... It's no High School Musical, but the songs are catchy, and the junior villains are worth rooting for." Tisha Mae Eaton of Moviepilot.com stated, "It's a movie that definitely had the feel of a Disney classic with a modern twist and I highly recommend it." Alex Reif of LaughingPlace.com gave it a score 4.5 out of 5 saying, "...I highly recommend this to any Disney fan, if for no other reason than to see what they’ve done with the characters, the Hocus Pocus references, and Kristen  [sic] Chenoweth’s Maleficent which is closer to the animated character than Angelina Jolie’s portrayal." Brian Lowry of Variety called it "...a playful and tuneful TV movie, exhibiting much higher ambitions than, say, the 'Teen Beach' franchise." By contrast, Amy Amatangelo of The Hollywood Reporter gave it a mixed review, calling it "High School Musical meets Once Upon a Time. It smartly ushers little girls who have grown up watching Disney movies into the tween audience and is an idea so ripe for merchandising that the Disney Store is already chock-full of Descendants costumes, dolls and t-shirts." She called the story "flimsy", but singled out the performances of Chenoweth, Najimy, Robinson and Jobrani.


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Descendants at the Internet Movie Database