Dragon Ball Super
Dragon Ball Super (Japanese: ドラゴンボール超（スーパー）, Hepburn: Doragon Bōru Sūpā) is an anime television series produced by Toei Animation that began airing on July 5, 2015. It is the first Dragon Ball television series featuring a new storyline in 18 years and is set after the defeat of Majin Boo, when the Earth has become peaceful once again. It is broadcast on Sundays at 9:00 am on Fuji TV.


== Plot ==
With Majin Boo defeated half-a-year prior, peace returns to Earth, where Son Goku (now a radish farmer) and his friends now live peaceful lives. However, a new threat appears in the form of Beerus, the God of Destruction (破壊神ビルス, Hakaishin Birusu). Considered the most terrifying being in the entire universe, Beerus is eager to fight the legendary warrior seen in a prophecy foretold decades ago, known as the Super Saiyan God (超サイヤ人ゴッド, Sūpā Saiya-jin Goddo).
The series initially tells events that place before, during, and after the events of the two canon movies, Dragon Ball Z: Battle of Gods and Dragon Ball Z: Resurrection 'F', before telling a new story about the exploration of the sixth of the twelve universes of the Dragon Ball multiverse,


== Production ==
In addition to his role as series creator, Akira Toriyama is also credited for the "original story & character design concepts" of the new anime directed by Kimitoshi Chioka. Toei Animation producer Atsushi Kido previously worked on Dragon Ball Z for a brief time during the Freeza arc, while Fuji TV producer Osamu Nozaki said he has been a fan of the series since childhood. Masako Nozawa reprises her roles as Son Goku, Son Gohan, and Son Goten.
The opening theme song is "Chōzetsu☆Dynamic!" (超絶☆ダイナミック！, "Excellent Dynamic!") by Kazuya Yoshii of The Yellow Monkey fame, while the ending theme is "Hello Hello Hello" (ハローハローハロー) by Japanese rock band Good Morning America. The lyrics to "Chōzetsu☆Dynamic!" were penned by Yukinojo Mori, who has written numerous songs for the Dragon Ball series. Norihito Sumitomo, the composer for Battle of Gods and Resurrection 'F', announced he will score the series.
The first preview video advertising the series aired on June 14, following episode 157 of Dragon Ball Kai. The next day, the main promotional image for Dragon Ball Super was added to its official website and unveiled two new characters, one of which was later revealed to be named Shanpa (シャンパ). A thirty-second trailer including the new characters was uploaded to the series' official website on June 26.
The anime is being adapted into a companion manga by Toriyama alongside artist Toyotarō, author behind the official Resurrection 'F' manga adaptation. It began serialization in the August 2015 issue of V Jump, which was released on June 20.


== Episode list ==


== Reception ==
First impressions of the series' debut episode were mostly positive, with the quality of animation being praised the most. Richard Eisenbeis of Kotaku praised the series' title sequence saying "My middle-school self is so happy right now, you guys." Jamieson Cox of The Verge also praised the title sequence, saying that "Dragon Ball Super's intro will have you begging for its North American release". Cox was also surprised that, considering how popular the franchise is, the series didn't launch internationally at the same time, calling it "a move that wouldn't be unprecedented" giving Sailor Moon Crystal as an example. Lucas Siegel of Comicbook.com praised the debut episode for its "laid back plotline" and animation style, saying that the debut was "very much put out as a “slice of life” episode". Siegel also noted that the premiere episode was more of a "where are they now" introduction to the series that will eventually help build anticipation for "where will they be."
The fifth episode of Dragon Ball Super, however, received harsh criticism from Japanese and Western audiences, mainly due to its poor animation style and repetition of previously-covered events.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Dragon Ball Super (anime) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia