Drishyam (2015 film)
Drishyam (English: Visual/The Sight) is a 2015 Indian thriller drama film directed by Nishikant Kamat. It features Ajay Devgn, Shriya Saran and Tabu in the lead roles, and produced by Kumar Mangat Pathak, Ajit Andhare and Abhishek Pathak. The film is a remake of Jeethu Joseph's 2013 Malayalam film Drishyam. The film was released 31 July 2015.


== Plot ==
Vijay Salgaonkar (Ajay Devgn) is an orphan who had dropped out of school after his 4th grade. Now he is a businessman running a cable TV service in a rural area. He is married to Nandini (Shriya Saran) and they have two daughters, Anju (Ishita Dutta), a Plus Two student, and Annu, a student of class sixth. His only interest apart from his family is watching films. He spends most of his time in front of the TV in his small office.
During a nature camp, Anju gets photographed in the bathroom by a hidden cell phone. The culprit, Sam aka Sameer is the son of police Inspector General Meera Deshmukh (Tabu). Sam is accidentally killed by Nandini and her daughter when he comes to blackmail them. They hide his body in a compost pit, which is witnessed by Annu. Nandini tells Vijay about the incident and he devises a way to save his family from the law. He removes the broken cell phone and disposes of Sam's car, which is seen by Sub-Inspector Laxmikant Gaitonde, who has a grudge against Vijay. Vijay takes them out on a trip to Panjim, watch a movie and eat at a restaurant. Meera, realising that her son has gone missing starts an investigation.
After a preliminary investigation, Meera calls Vijay and family for questioning. Vijay had predicted that this would happen and taught his family how to change their alibi at the time of murder. When questioned individually, they replied the same thing and they had also shown the bill of the restaurant, the movie ticket and the bus journeys' tickets as proof of their alibi. Meera questions the owners of the establishments they have been to and their statements prove Vijay's alibi. Meera realises that on the day of the incident, Vijay had taken the tickets and the bill, made acquaintance with the owners and had gone for the trip with his family the next day, thus proving his alibi and making the owners unwittingly tell the lie.
Meera arrests Vijay and family and Gaitonde uses brute force to beat the truth out of them. Eventually, Annu gives in and reveals the place where the body is buried. After digging the compost pit, they find the carcass of a calf, indicating that Vijay had moved the body. Vijay reports to the media and complains against Gaitonde. The constable is suspended and Meera resigns from her post. Meera and her husband meet Vijay to ask forgiveness for their rude and violent behavior. But Vijay indirectly tells them that he had got rid of 'the uninvited guest'. Vijay, now in remand, signs a register at the newly constructed local police station. As he leaves, a flashback shows him leaving the incomplete police station with a shovel in hand, indicating that he has hidden Sam's body in the foundations of the new police station itself.


== Cast ==
Ajay Devgn as Vijay Salgaonkar, Owner of Mirage Cable Network
Shriya Saran as Nandini Vijay Salgaonkar
Tabu as Inspector General Meera Nair
Rajat Kapoor as Mahesh Deshmukh (Meera's Husband)
Ishita Dutta as Anju Salgaonkar (Vijay's elder daughter)
Mrunal Jadhav as Annu Salgaonkar (Vijay's younger daughter)
Prathamesh Parab as Jose, Vijay's Assistant at Mirage Cable Network
Kamlesh Sawant as Sub-Inspector Gaitonde
Rishabh Chadda as Sameer Deshmukh aka Sam (Mahesh And Meera's Son)
Vikas Kumar as Alex, Sam's Friend
Jubin as Jubin


== Production ==


=== Casting ===
In October 2014, it was announced that Saif Ali Khan would take the lead role and reprise the role played by Mohanlal in the 2013 Malayalam predecessor, but in November 2014, it was announced that Ajay Devgn would star in the Malayalam remake of the 2013 film Drishyam, which will be produced by Viacom 18 Motion Pictures in association with Panorama Studios and directed by Nishikant Kamat. Plans then were to have Devgn reprise the role played by Mohanlal in the 2013 film. Later it was announced that Tabu will be playing the role of Meera Deshmukh a cop and Shriya Saran will play the wife of Ajay Devgn's character.


=== Filming ===
Principal photography for the film was slated to begin in February 2015. Ajit Andhare, the Chief operating officer of Viacom 18 Motion Pictures stated "Drishyam is an iconic film that leaves you spellbound and intrigued long after you have watched it. Its box office record in Malayalam & Telugu speaks for itself." Actor Ajay Devgn had been in Canada to shoot snow scenes for his upcoming film Shivaay, but light snow conditions had him reschedule that film and return to India to instead begin Drishyam. The First 20 Day Shooting schedule of the film began on 13 March 2015 in Goa and ended on 1 April 2015. The second schedule of the film began on 2nd week of April. The first look of the film was unveiled on 29 May 2015.


=== Controversies ===
On the announcement of the Hindi remake, film producer Ekta Kapoor sent a legal notice to the makers of the Malayalam filmmakers. Ekta Kapoor has acquired the movie rights of Japanese author Keigo Higashino's book, The Devotion of Suspect X and her legal team has claimed that Drishyam is a film adaptation of the novel, for which they have purchased rights. However, the film's director Jeethu Joseph, who will also be directing the Tamil version, clarifies that his film is neither a adaptation nor a copy of the Japanese novel and film.
Drishyam has been declared tax free in Uttar Pradesh


== Soundtrack ==
The music for Drishyam is composed by Vishal Bhardwaj with lyrics written by Gulzar. A song titled "Carbon Copy", which was sung by Ash King, was released on 7 July 2015. The music rights for Drishyam are acquired by Zee Music Company. Here is the track list:


== Release ==
Drishyam released on 31 July 2015. Drishyam had a very wide release of 2365 screens in India.


== Character chart of Drishyam and its remakes ==


== Reception ==


=== Critical reception ===
Meena Iyer of The Times of India gave the film four out of five stars, describing it as "A suspense drama with a nail-biting finish." Iyer criticized the casting choices for some of the Salgaonkar family, but praised Devgan and Tabu's performances, "Ajay, who is the prey here, shines in his role of the protective father ... Tabu [is] outstanding as his predator." The Indian Express, however, gave the remake two and a half out of five stars and found fault with the chemistry between Devgan and Shriya Saran, who plays his character's wife. Indian Express described Devgan's performance as "stilted" and Tabu's performance as "off-and-on", commenting that she comes off as stiff at times.
Rohit Vats of Hindustan Times rated the film three and half out of five stars, describing it as "Stunning, gripping, edge-of-the-seat, shocking, engrossing". Vats praised the film for being successful as a suspense thriller.
Raja Sen of Rediff gave the film a rating of two and a half out of five stars, noting the pace of the film begins "far too snoozily". Sen described Tabu's character as Inspector General Nair as a "badass superstar", but overall felt "the film is clumsily written, with dialogue that sounds wooden. Contrarily, Bollywood Hungama gave the film four out of five stars and didn't notice the same pacing and script problems as Sen. "There is no single moment in the film suffers a lag ... As for the taut screenplay (Upendra Sidhye), it keeps on playing with your mind all the time. You know what happened but even then you are taken for a ride and you start believing in it."
Martin D'Souza of Glamsham gave it four out of five stars and stated "Drishyam is a spot-on crime thriller that has some 'heart-in-your-mouth' moments. It's set up in a made-up village called Pondolim in North Goa. What's satisfying about the entire screenplay is that what Vijay is doing on screen is what you will do for your family. Nothing less; after all, family is all that we have!"
Subhash K. Jha of gave it four and half out of five stars and stated "Nishikant Kamat’s Drishyam is an outright winner . It is not just a remarkably resonant remake but also a unique stand-alone experience."
Suchitra Bajpai Chaudhary of Gulf News gave it four and half out of five stars and stated "There are no loose ends in the plot; every character, every situation is well planned and visualised to perfection. The background score is evocative though a song that served to highlight the trauma of the characters seemed eminently forgettable."
The Free Press Journal (FPJ Bureau) Said, "The climax is just awesome and worth watching and waiting for. Performance-wise, Ajay is very good, as is Tabu. Shriya and the daughters have also acted brilliantly and do justice to their characters. The film’s direction and screenplay is very good, while the music is okay. I would say, the movie is must watch."


=== Box office ===
Drishyam grossed ₹8.05 crore (US$1.2 million) on the first day of its release in India. It went on to gross ₹9.4 crore (US$1.4 million) on Saturday and ₹12.58 crore (US$1.9 million) on first Sunday to take the first weekend total to ₹30.03 crore (US$4.6 million). By the end of its 1st week, the film had grossed about ₹46.28 crore (US$7.1 million). The movie has grossed ₹62.87 crore (US$9.6 million) in 13 days at domestic box office.
Internationally, the film collected ₹8.0 crore (US$1.2 million) in its opening weekend.


== References ==


== External links ==
Drishyam at the Internet Movie Database