Kylie Jenner
Kylie Kristen Jenner (born August 10, 1997) is an American reality television personality, socialite and model. Born and raised in Los Angeles, California, she is best known for appearing on the E! reality television series Keeping Up with the Kardashians. In 2012, she collaborated with the clothing brand PacSun, along with her sister Kendall, and created their own line "Kendall & Kylie". Their sci-fi novel, Rebels: City of Indra, was released in 2014. Time magazine named the Jenner sisters in "The 25 Most Influential Teens of 2014" for their considerable influence among teens on social media.


== Early lifeEdit ==
Jenner is the youngest daughter of 1976 Summer Olympics decathlon winner Caitlyn Jenner and TV personality Kris Jenner. She has an older sister, Kendall. On Kris's side of the family, she has three older half-sisters, Kourtney Kardashian, Kim Kardashian, and Khloé Kardashian, and one older half-brother, Rob Kardashian. Jenner also has three older half-brothers from Caitlyn's side of the family—Burt, Brandon, and Brody Jenner—and an older half-sister, Casey. Kris is of Dutch, English, and Scottish ancestry. Jenner attended Sierra Canyon School, where she was a member of the cheerleading team. In 2012, she decided homeschooling would be a better option and enrolled in an at-home education program, from which she graduated with a high school diploma in July 2015 from Laurel Springs School.


== CareerEdit ==


=== Reality televisionEdit ===
In 2007, Jenner, along with her parents and siblings, Kendall, Kourtney, Kim, Khloé, and Rob, began appearing in the reality television series Keeping Up with the Kardashians, which chronicles the personal and professional lives of their family members. The series was successful for its network, E!, and has resulted in the creation of numerous spin-offs including Kourtney and Kim Take Miami, Khloé & Lamar, Kourtney and Kim Take New York, and Kourtney and Khloé Take The Hamptons, in which Jenner has made multiple guest appearances. There have also been speculations about a possible spin-off series starring the Jenner sisters, following a multi-year extension deal that the family signed with the E! network in 2015.


=== Personal brandingEdit ===

Jenner has two nail lacquers from the Nicole by OPI nail polish brand called Wear Something Spar-kylie and Rainbow in the S-kylie. They earned $100,000 each for their OPI endorsements in 2013. On November 15, 2013, the Jenner sisters announced that they would launch The Kendall & Kylie collection with PacSun which launched on February 2013. Since its conception, the sisters have released several collections for this line. In July 2013 the Jenner sisters launched a jewelry line with Pascal Mouawad's Glamhouse to create the Metal Haven by Kendall & Kylie jewellery collection.
In February 2014, she and Kendall launched a shoe and handbag line for Steve Madden's Madden Girl line. Jenner launched her hair extension line with Bellami Hair, entitled Kylie Hair Kouture, includes sixteen different shades and a wet to dry hair-brush. On 9 March 2015, skin care line Nip + Fab announced that Jenner became their second ambassador ever since Millie Mackintosh. In June 2015, the Jenner sisters launched their clothing line Kendall + Kylie with British fashion retailer Topshop.


=== Media appearancesEdit ===
Jenner, along with her sister Kendall, have co-hosted numerous public events together. The sisters hosted Glee: The 3D Concert Movie at the Regency Village Theater in Westwood, California on August 6, 2011, as well as the premiere of The Vow in Hollywood, California on February 6, 2012. The Jenners also interviewed the cast of The Hunger Games premiere in the Bing Box at The Nokia Theatre L.A. Live on March 12, 2012. The Jenner sisters co-hosted the 2014 Much Music Video Awards, where Kylie made her acting debut in a promo for the show in Toronto, Canada, on June 15, 2014. The Jenner sisters introduced brother-in-law Kanye West's performance at the Billboard Music Awards on May 17, 2015.


=== Other worksEdit ===
Jenner began her modeling career with the Sears line "Crush Your Style" and has done photo shoots with photographer Nick Saglimbeni and modeled for her cousin Natasha's clothing company. She has also expressed an interest in acting, but has explained that college is a greater priority. Jenner announced that she hopes to pursue an acting career, saying "Right now I love designing and I want to pursue that career once I turn 18, but acting is something I would regret not giving a chance when I'm older, so I would love to try it and see if I like it, I used to do plays in school and then in my community. I would participate in all of them 'til I was 13". In August 2014, Jenner sisters appeared in singer PartyNextDoor's "Recognize" music video which also featured Drake. In 2011, they were featured in Seventeen magazine's Style Stars of the Year, and selected them as "Style Ambassadors" for the magazine. In 2014, the Jenner sisters co-authored science fiction novel Rebels: City of Indra with ghostwriter Maya Sloan. The novel was criticized upon release as a ghostwritten work, which prompted Sloan to clarify that the book was compiled and edited from the Jenner sisters' original ideas.
Jenner has been featured on the covers of various teen, beauty and fashion magazines, including Cosmopolitan (February 2015), Teen Vogue (March 2012, May 2015), Marie Claire Mexico (March 2014), Seventeen (September 2012), Remix (March 2015), Seventeen Prom (January 2014) and Girlfriend (September 2014).


== CharityEdit ==
Jenner set up an eBay account where she auctions old clothing to raise money for the Children's Hospital Los Angeles. The Kardashian and Jenner sisters used eBay in this way to raise $27,682.96 for their charities in 2013. Jenner joined her family in a charity yard sale on November 10, 2013. Proceeds from the sale were donation-matched and sent to Share Our Strength: No Kid Hungry and the Greater Los Angeles Fisher House Foundation. She joined Khloe, Kendall, Lil Twist, and The Game at PINZ bowling alley in Studio City, California for a charity bowling game on January 19, 2014. The event was held to raise money for The Robin Hood Foundation, a nonprofit for which The Game pledged to raise $1 million in donations. The Jenner sisters participated in singer Chris Brown's two Kick’n It For Charity Celebrity Kickball games in Glendale, California on July 19, 2014 and on August 16, 2014. At the first game, she competed on actor/singer Quincy Brown's Team; while Kendall played on Chris Brown‘s Team Breezy.


== Personal lifeEdit ==
In February 2015, Jenner purchased a $2.7 million five-bedroom, 5.5-bath mansion in an upscale gated community in Calabasas, California, which she made her primary residence upon her 18th birthday. Jenner started dating rapper Tyga in 2014 which sparked controversy from their age differences. She is a close friend of singer Pia Mia.
Jenner admitted to getting a lip augmentation on a episode of Keeping Up with the Kardashians when it aired in May 2015. Her enhanced lips from lip fillers created speculation and gained her publicity. She stated before the episode she just used lip liner and over lined her lips. Fans enlarged their lips with implements such as bottles and posted the results online to compete in the "Kylie Jenner Challenge". Jenner replied by tweeting "I'm not here to try & encourage people/young girls to look like me or to think this is the way they should look." Other celebrities such as English-Romani singer Cher Lloyd also responded and disapproved the challenge.


== FilmographyEdit ==


== Awards and nominationsEdit ==


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
Kylie Jenner at the Internet Movie Database