Mamie Gummer
Mary Willa "Mamie" Gummer (born August 3, 1983) is an American actress mostly known for her role as Emily Owens in the TV series Emily Owens, M.D.


== Early life ==
Gummer was born in New York City, New York, and is the daughter of actress Meryl Streep and sculptor Don Gummer. She grew up in Salisbury, Connecticut, and also spent five years in Los Angeles, California, with her older brother, Henry Wolfe Gummer, and younger sisters, actress Grace Gummer and model Louisa Gummer.


== Career ==
As a young child, she appeared with her mother in Heartburn (credited under the name Natalie Stern to avoid press scrutiny). 20 months old at the time of filming, she received a positive review in the New York Times. She attended Miss Porter's School, and graduated from the Kent School in Kent, Connecticut, before continuing her studies in theater and communications at Northwestern University, graduating in 2005. Later that year, she made her off-Broadway debut alongside Michael C. Hall in the premiere of Noah Haidle's Mr. Marmalade, for which she won a Theatre World Award. In 2007, she received a Lucille Lortel Award nomination for her performance in Theresa Rebeck's The Water's Edge.
Gummer made her motion-picture debut as an adult with a minor role in Lasse Hallström's The Hoax (2006), starring Richard Gere. In 2007, she starred with her mother in Michael Cunningham's film adaptation of Susan Minot's novel Evening, playing her mother as a young woman. The film, directed by Lajos Koltai, featured Vanessa Redgrave, Glenn Close, and Claire Danes.
She portrayed Sally Adams in the 2008 HBO mini series John Adams, which details the life of the second President of the United States. She made her Broadway debut in the Tony Award-nominated revival of Les liaisons dangereuses in 2008, for which she received critical praise. She also guest-starred on the CBS legal drama The Good Wife in the season 1 episode "Bad" portraying Nancy Crozier. Her character returned again on season 2 episodes "Cleaning House" and "Getting Off".
In 2010, she starred in The Lightkeepers with Richard Dreyfuss, Tom Wisdom, Blythe Danner and Bruce Dern.
Starting in 2011, she starred in the ABC medical show Off the Map with Zach Gilford and Valerie Cruz. The show was created by Jenna Bans and Shonda Rhimes. In April 2011, she starred with Hamish Linklater and Alison Fraser, in the Off-Broadway production of The School For Lies written by David Ives, directed by Walter Bobbie, and produced by Classic Stage Company.
In 2012, she starred in the CW's Emily Owens, M.D.. The series was cancelled early on in its first season, but the network continued to air the rest of its 13-episode order.


== Personal life ==
After a year and a half of dating, Gummer became engaged to actor Benjamin Walker in October 2009. They married in July 2011 on her parents' estate in Connecticut, and resided in Park Slope, Brooklyn, New York City. In March 2013, it was announced that Gummer and Walker had amicably separated and plan to divorce.
Gummer has been involved with charities such as Women's Refugee Commission and the Nomi Network.
Her father is of Norwegian and English descent. Her mother has German, Swiss-German, English, and Irish ancestry.


== Filmography ==


== Awards ==
(2006) Theatre World Award
Winner: Best Supporting Actress for Mr. Marmalade

(2007) Lucille Lortel Award
Nomination: Outstanding Featured Actress for The Water's Edge

(2009) Lucille Lortel Award
Nomination: Outstanding Featured Actress for Uncle Vanya


== References ==


== External links ==
Mamie Gummer at the Internet Movie Database
Backstage.com
PaperMag
Broadway.com