Marilyn Monroe
Marilyn Monroe (born Norma Jeane Mortenson; June 1, 1926 – August 5, 1962) was an American actress, model, and singer, who became a major sex symbol, starring in a number of commercially successful motion pictures during the 1950s and early 1960s.
After spending much of her childhood in foster homes, Monroe began a career as a model, which led to a film contract in 1946 with Twentieth Century-Fox. Her early film appearances were minor, but her performances in The Asphalt Jungle and All About Eve (both 1950) drew attention. By 1952 she had her first leading role in Don't Bother to Knock and 1953 brought a lead in Niagara, a melodramatic film noir that dwelt on her seductiveness. Her 'dumb blonde' persona was used to comic effect in subsequent films such as Gentlemen Prefer Blondes (1953), How to Marry a Millionaire (1953) and The Seven Year Itch (1955). Limited by typecasting, Monroe studied at the Actors Studio to broaden her range. Her dramatic performance in Bus Stop (1956) was hailed by critics and garnered a Golden Globe nomination. Her production company, Marilyn Monroe Productions, released The Prince and the Showgirl (1957), for which she received a BAFTA Award nomination and won a David di Donatello award. She received a Golden Globe Award for her performance in Some Like It Hot (1959). Monroe's last completed film was The Misfits (1961), co-starring Clark Gable, with a screenplay written by her then-husband, Arthur Miller.
The final years of Monroe's life were marked by illness, personal problems, and a reputation for unreliability and being difficult to work with. Ever since Monroe's death from an overdose of barbiturates on August 5, 1962, the exact circumstances have been subject to conjecture. Though officially classified as a "probable suicide", the possibilities of an accidental overdose or a homicide have not been ruled out. In 1999, Monroe was ranked as the sixth-greatest female star of all time by the American Film Institute. In the decades following her death, she has often been cited as both a pop and a cultural icon as well as the quintessential American sex symbol. In 2009, TV Guide Network named her No. 1 in Film's Sexiest Women of All Time.


== Early life ==

Monroe was born Norma Jeane Mortenson at the charity ward of the Los Angeles County Hospital on June 1, 1926  as the third child of Gladys Pearl Baker (née Monroe, 1902 –1984), a negative-cutter at Columbia. Gladys' older children, Robert (nicknamed "Jack" or "Jackie", 1917–1933) and Berniece (1919–), were from her first marriage to John Newton Baker (also called Jasper or Jack), whom she had married in 1917 at the age of 15 after becoming pregnant by him. She had filed for divorce in 1921, after which Baker had taken the children with him to his native Kentucky; Monroe would have no contact with her sister until adulthood. Gladys had then married Martin Edward Mortensen in 1924, but they had separated after only a few months and before she had become pregnant with Monroe; they would divorce in 1928. However, in Monroe's birth certificate, Gladys named Mortensen as the father (although the name was misspelled), probably to avoid the stigma of illegitimacy. During Monroe's childhood, Mortenson, Mortensen and Baker were all variably used as her surnames.
The identity of Monroe's father is unknown. Biographers Fred Guiles and Lois Banner have stated that her father was most likely Charles Stanley Gifford, a co-worker with whom Gladys had had an affair in 1925 and whose photograph she had allegedly shown Monroe, telling her it was her father. Anthony Summers and Donald Spoto disagree. In addition to the lack of evidence to prove Gifford's paternity, Spoto has stated that Monroe did not know who her father was, although as an adult she unsuccessfully tried to contact a number of men, including Gifford, to find answers. He instead suggests that any of Gladys' boyfriends in 1925 may have been the father, naming film developer Raymond Guthrie as the strongest possibility.
When Monroe was only a few weeks old, her mother placed her with evangelical Christian foster parents Albert and Ida Bolender in Hawthorne, California, as she was unable to quit working to take care of her. She paid for Monroe's upkeep and, according to Banner, lived with them to take care of the child herself until longer working hours forced her to move back to Hollywood in 1927, after which she visited her daughter weekly. Monroe lived with the Bolenders until the age of seven in 1933, when she was able to move in with her mother. Soon after, Gladys bought a small house for them, which they shared with lodgers, English actors George and Maude Atkinson. However, only some months later in early 1934, Gladys had a mental breakdown and was hospitalized. She was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia and was institutionalized at the State Hospital in Norwalk in 1935, spending the rest of her life in and out of hospitals.
Following her mother's hospitalization, Monroe was declared a ward of the state, and her mother's friend, Grace McKee Goddard, took responsibility over her and her mother's affairs, later becoming her legal guardian. She was however often unable to foster Monroe herself, and placed her in foster families, most of them her friends and family members, although she would visit her often. In September 1935, she was placed in the Los Angeles Orphans Home (later named Hollygrove) and began attending nearby Vine Street Elementary School. Biographers disagree on how long she spent at the orphanage, with accounts varying from nine months to two years, and in how many foster families she stayed afterwards. Spoto and Banner agree that after briefly staying with Grace and her husband Erwin "Doc" Goddard, she lived for several months from November 1937 onwards with her maternal uncle's wife Olive Monroe and their children, and for over two years from September 1938 onwards with Grace's aunt, Ana Atchinson Lower, in West Los Angeles. Lower introduced Monroe to her faith, Christian Science, which services she began to attend weekly. She attended Emerson Middle School, where she wrote for the school's newspaper and was elected "the Oomph Girl" by her classmates. Due to elderly Lower's health issues, Monroe moved to live with the Goddards in Van Nuys in either late 1940 or early 1941, and after graduating from Emerson began attending Van Nuys High School.
As an adult, Monroe told several friends and interviewers that she had been sexually abused during her childhood. It is unclear when this occurred and who the perpetrator was; biographers have named George Atkinson, Doc Goddard and one of Monroe's cousins as possibilities. Due to lack of evidence to either prove or disprove the claims, biographers have been divided in their opinions: Summers, Guiles and Carl Rollyson have denied them as fabrication, while Spoto, Banner, Gloria Steinem, and Barbara Leaming have accepted them as truthful. In her analysis on the topic, Sarah Churchwell has stated that biographers' opinions on both sides of the debate have been "predetermined by what they already believe" about Monroe's personality and sexual abuse in general, and that "we simply don't know what happened".
In early 1942, the company that Doc Goddard worked for named him the head of sales at their plant in West Virginia. California laws prevented the Goddards from taking the fifteen-year-old Monroe out of state, and she faced the possibility of having to return to the orphanage. As a solution, it was decided that she would marry the neighbors' 21-year-old son, James "Jim" Dougherty (1921–2005). Biographers disagree on whether he and Monroe had already been dating before the Goddards knew they were moving to the East Coast or whether the marriage was entirely arranged by Grace. They married on June 19, 1942, after Monroe had just turned 16. Subsequently, she dropped out of high school and became a housewife. In 1943, Dougherty enlisted in the Merchant Marine. He was initially stationed on Santa Catalina Island off California's coast, and she lived with him there for several months until he was shipped out to the Pacific in April 1944. Monroe then moved in with Dougherty's parents, and began working at the Radioplane Munitions Factory as part of the war effort, mainly spraying airplane parts with fire retardant and inspecting parachutes.


== Career ==


=== Modeling and first film roles (1945–1949) ===

In late 1944, photographers from the U.S. Army Air Forces' First Motion Picture Unit were sent to the Radioplane factory to shoot morale-boosting photographs of young women helping the war effort. One of the photographers, David Conover, took notice of Monroe, and although none of the pictures that he took of her at the factory were used, he offered her work as a model. She quit working at the factory in January 1945, and spent the following months modeling for him and his photographer friends. Conover also encouraged Monroe to apply to the Blue Book Model Agency, run by Emmeline Snively, which signed her in August 1945. She began to occasionally use the name Jean Norman when working, and at the suggestion of the agency had her curly brunette hair straightened and dyed blond. As her figure was deemed more suitable for pin-up modeling than high fashion, she was employed mostly for advertisements and men's magazines, posing for photographers such as Andre de Dienes, Joseph Jasgur and Bruno Bernard as well as the illustrator Earl Moran. Monroe quickly became one of the agency's most successful models, to the extent of at times losing work due to becoming overexposed.
Impressed by her success, Snively arranged a contract for Monroe with talent agency National Concert Artists Corporation in June 1946. Through the agency, she met Ben Lyon, a 20th Century-Fox executive, who arranged a screen test for her. Darryl F. Zanuck, the head executive of the studio, was unenthusiastic about her, but was persuaded to give her a standard six-month contract in August 1946, after Hedda Hopper wrote in her gossip column that Howard Hughes was interested in signing her for RKO after seeing her in a bikini on a magazine cover. Deciding that Norma Jeane Dougherty was not a suitable screen name, Lyon and Monroe chose her the name Marilyn Monroe. The first name was his suggestion as she reminded him of Broadway star Marilyn Miller, and the last was her mother's maiden name. In September 1946, Monroe also divorced Dougherty, allowing her to concentrate fully on her acting career.

Monroe had no film roles in the first months of her contract and instead dedicated her days to acting, singing and dancing classes as well as to learning about different aspects of filmmaking. Her contract was renewed in February 1947, and during that spring she was given her first two film roles: a one-line appearance in the comedy Scudda Hoo! Scudda Hay! (1948), and minor role as a waitress with nine lines of dialogue in the drama Dangerous Years (1947). The studio also paid for her to attend acting classes at the Actors' Laboratory Theatre, an acting school teaching the techniques of the Group Theatre. However, her contract was not renewed for a second time and she was let go in August 1947.
Following her dismissal, Monroe returned to modeling, and was also aided financially by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer's (MGM) talent executive Lucille Ryman and her husband, actor John Carroll, whom she had befriended during her contract. She was able to continue taking classes at the Actors' Lab, and in October appeared as a blonde vamp in the play Glamour Preferred at the Bliss-Hayden Theater, but it was not reviewed by any major publication.
Monroe landed her second film contract, with Columbia Pictures for six months with a salary of $125 per week, in March 1948. According to Spoto, Summers and Banner, it was arranged for her by Fox executive Joseph M. Schenck, whose mistress she was at the time. At Columbia, Monroe began working with the studio's head drama coach, Natasha Lytess, who would remain her mentor until 1955, and had some modifications made to her appearance: her hairline was raised by electrolysis and her hair was bleached even lighter, to platinum blond. She appeared in only one film during the contract, the low-budget musical Ladies of the Chorus (1948), but was cast in its main role of Peggy Martin, a burlesque artist who is courted by a wealthy socialite. Despite the starring role, Monroe's contract was not renewed in September 1948. Ladies of the Chorus was released the following month and was not a success.
After leaving Columbia, Monroe became a protégé of Johnny Hyde, vice president of the William Morris Agency. He began representing her and paid for her to have a silicone prosthesis implanted in her jaw and possibly a rhinoplasty. The first role which Hyde arranged for her was a brief appearance in the Marx Brothers film Love Happy (1949). Despite Hyde's aid, Monroe struggled financially, and in May 1949 posed for an advertisement for Pabst Blue Ribbon beer as well as in nude photos shot by photographer Tom Kelley. Although her role in Love Happy had been very small, she was chosen to participate in the film's promotional tour in New York in the summer, although its general release did not take place until 1950.


=== Breakthrough (1950–1952) ===

Monroe appeared in six films released in 1950. Four of them –Love Happy, A Ticket to Tomahawk, Right Cross and The Fireball– were unremarkable films in which she had minor roles, but she also had supporting roles in two of the most acclaimed films of the year: John Huston's film noir The Asphalt Jungle and Joseph Mankiewicz's drama All About Eve. In the former, Monroe played Angela, the young mistress of an aging criminal. Although her on-screen time was only five minutes, she gained a mention in Photoplay and according to Spoto "moved effectively from movie model to serious actress". In the latter, Monroe played Miss Caswell, a naïve young actress. The same year she also appeared in a television advertisement for Royal Triton motor oil.
Following Monroe's success in these roles, Hyde negotiated for her a seven-year contract with the starting salary of $500 per week (subject to annual increase) with 20th Century-Fox in December 1950, shortly before dying of a heart attack. With the new contract, Monroe started gaining more visibility. In March 1951, she presented an award at the 23rd Academy Awards ceremony and in September, Collier's became the first national magazine to publish a full-length profile of her. She had supporting roles in four low-budget films released in 1951, in the drama Home Town Story, which she had filmed for MGM before her contract with Fox, and in three moderately successful comedies as part of her new contract, As Young as You Feel, Love Nest, and Let's Make It Legal. Although all four films featured her "essentially [as] a sexy ornament", she received some good notices from the critics, with Bosley Crowther of The New York Times describing her as "superb" in As Young As You Feel and Ezra Goodman of the Los Angeles Daily News calling her "one of the brightest up-and-coming [actresses]" for Love Nest. To further develop her acting skills, she began taking classes with Michael Chekhov in addition to her usual ones with Lytess. Her popularity with the audiences was also growing: she was receiving several thousand letters of fan mail a week, and was declared "Miss Cheesecake of 1951" by the army newspaper Stars and Stripes, reflecting the preferences of soldiers in the Korean War.
The second year of the contract saw Monroe become a celebrity and a top-billed actress. In early 1952, she began a highly publicized romance with retired baseball player Joe DiMaggio, one of the most famous sports personalities of the era. In March, a scandal broke when she revealed in an interview that she had posed for nude pictures in 1949, which were featured in popular calendars. The studio had learnt of the photographs some weeks earlier, and in order to contain their potentially disastrous effects on her career, they and Monroe had decided to talk about them openly while stressing that she had only posed for them due to a dire financial situation. The strategy succeeded in gaining her public sympathy as well as increasing her popularity: the following month, she was featured on the cover of Life as "The Talk of Hollywood". Monroe added to her reputation as a new sex symbol with other publicity stunts that year, such as by wearing a dress which décolleté was cut down to her navel when acting as Grand Marshal at the Miss America Pageant parade, and by revealing in Earl Wilson's column that she usually wore no underwear.

The nude photo scandal ensured that all five films in which Monroe appeared in 1952 became popular with the audiences. The first of these was the drama Clash by Night, directed by Fritz Lang and released in June. Monroe was loaned to RKO for the film, in which she was featured in an atypically unglamorous role as a girl living in a remote California fishing village, allowing her to show more of her acting range. It gained her positives notices, with the Hollywood Reporter stating that "she deserves starring status with her excellent interpretation," and the Daily Variety writing that she "has an ease of delivery which makes her a cinch for popularity." In July, Monroe starred in two films, as a beauty pageant contestant in the comedy We're Not Married! and as a mentally disturbed babysitter in the thriller Don't Bother to Knock. According to its writer, Nunnally Johnson, the former role was created solely to "present Marilyn in two bathing suits", but the latter film was intended as a vehicle for her to show that she was capable of acting in heavier dramatic roles. It received mixed reviews from critics, with Bosley Crowther deeming her too inexperienced for the difficult role, and Variety blaming the script for the film's problems. Her next role as an attractive secretary in the screwball comedy Monkey Business was one of the first to feature her as a "dumb, childish blonde, innocently unaware of the havoc her sexiness causes around her", marking the beginning of typecasting in her career. Monroe's final film of the year was O. Henry's Full House, in which she appeared in a minor role as a prostitute.
It was during this period that Monroe also gained "a reputation for being difficult on film sets", which would only get stronger as her career progressed: she was often late to work or did not show up at all, had trouble remembering her lines, and would demand several re-takes until she was satisfied. Her reliance on her acting coaches, first Natasha Lytess and later, Paula Strasberg, also often irritated her directors. Biographers have attributed these issues to a combination of perfectionism, low self-esteem, stage fright, and her gradually escalating use of barbiturates and amphetamines.


=== Establishment as a star (1953) ===

Monroe starred in three films released in 1953, which established her as one of the most bankable Hollywood stars as well as one of the biggest sex symbols of the 1950s. The first of these was the Technicolor film noir Niagara, in which she played Rose Loomis, a femme fatale scheming to murder her husband, played by Joseph Cotten. By Niagara, Monroe and her make-up artist Allan "Whitey" Snyder had developed the iconic make-up look that would henceforth be associated with her. Rose was the most overtly sexual role of her career, and the film included scenes in which her body was covered only by a sheet or a towel, which contemporary audiences considered shocking. However, its most famous scene was a long shot of Monroe shown from behind walking down a street with her hips swaying; it was used heavily in the film's marketing and gained her the nickname "the girl with the horizontal walk". Niagara became a box office hit upon its release in January. Reviews of the film dwelled on her sexually suggestive performance, with many finding it "indecent". Monroe also continued to attract attention with her revealing outfits in publicity events, most famously when she appeared in a skin-tight gold lamé dress at the Photoplay awards in January 1953, where she won the "Fastest Rising Star Award", prompting veteran star Joan Crawford to describe her behavior as "unbecoming an actress and a lady" to the press.

If Niagara had made Monroe one of the biggest Hollywood sex symbols and established her "look", her second film of the year, musical comedy Gentlemen Prefer Blondes, established her star image as a "dumb blonde". Based on Anita Loos' bestselling novel and its subsequent Broadway and film versions, the film focused on show girls Lorelei Lee and Dorothy Shaw, played by Monroe and Jane Russell, who are looking for rich husbands. The role of Lorelei was originally intended for Betty Grable, who had been 20th Century-Fox's most popular "blonde bombshell" in the 1940s; Monroe was now fast eclipsing her as a star who could appeal to both male and female audiences. The film included one of the most famous scenes of her career, a performance of "Diamonds Are a Girl's Best Friend" in a shocking pink dress. As part of the film's publicity campaign, she and Russell pressed their hand- and footprints in wet concrete in the forecourt of Grauman's Chinese Theatre in June. Gentlemen Prefer Blondes was released shortly after and became one of the biggest box office successes of the year, earning back more than double its production costs.

In September, Monroe made her television debut in the Jack Benny Show, playing Jack's fantasy woman in the episode "Honolulu Trip". In November, her third film of the year, How to Marry a Millionaire, was released. Repeating the successful formula of Gentlemen Prefer Blondes, it featured her in the role of nearsighted and naïve beauty Pola Debevoise, who together with her friends, played by Betty Grable and Lauren Bacall, rents a penthouse from Manhattan for the summer in order to find rich husbands for all three. It was the first film filmed in and second film ever released in CinemaScope, Fox's newest asset in their attempt to win back audiences who had cut down on their cinema-going after the popularization of television. The film was another smash hit, earning even more than Gentlemen Prefer Blondes and prompting the statement that "in 1953, Fox's two greatest assets were CinemaScope and Marilyn Monroe, in that order". In both 1953 and 1954, she was listed in the annual Top Ten Money Making Stars Poll, which was compiled from the votes of movie exhibitors throughout the United States for the stars that had generated the most revenue in their theaters over the previous year.
Monroe's position as a leading sex symbol was further strengthened in December, when Hugh Hefner, who had bought the rights for her nudes from the 1949 Kelley session, featured one of the images, previously unreleased "Golden Dreams", as the centerfold and a photograph of her in a low-cut dress at the Miss America Pageant parade in 1952 as the cover in the first issue of Playboy.


=== Conflicts with 20th Century-Fox (1954–1955) ===
Although Monroe had become one of 20th Century-Fox's biggest stars, her contract had remained the same since 1950, meaning that she was paid far less than her colleagues and could not choose her projects or the people she worked with. She was also tired of being typecast, and her attempts to be cast in films other than comedies or musicals had been thwarted by Zanuck. In December 1953, she was slated to begin filming yet another musical comedy, The Girl in Pink Tights, with Frank Sinatra. In protest, she did not show up on set when filming was due to start, which resulted in the studio suspending her on January 4, 1954.

The suspension was front page news and Monroe immediately began a campaign of self-promotion to counter any negative publicity and to strengthen her position in the conflict. On January 14, she and Joe DiMaggio, whose relationship had been subject to constant media attention since 1952, were married in San Francisco. She then traveled with DiMaggio to Japan, combining a honeymoon with his business trip. From there, she traveled alone to Korea, where she performed songs from her films as part of a USO show for 60–70,000 American marines over a four-day period. After returning to Hollywood in February, she was awarded Photoplay's "Most Popular Female Star" prize. She reached a settlement with the studio in March: it included a new contract to be made later in the year, and a starring role in the film version of Broadway hit play The Seven Year Itch, for which she was to receive a bonus of $100,000.
The following month saw the release of the Western River of No Return, in which Monroe appeared opposite Robert Mitchum. She called it a "Z-grade cowboy movie in which the acting finished second to the scenery and the CinemaScope process", although it was popular with the audiences. The first film she made after returning to the studio was the musical There's No Business Like Show Business, which she strongly disliked but which the studio required her to do in exchange for dropping The Girl in Pink Tights. It flopped upon its released in December. Monroe's performance, although she played only a supporting role, was in particular singled out for negative notices: Ed Sullivan described her performance of the song "Heat Wave" in the film as "one of the most flagrant violations of good taste" he had witnessed, while Bosley Crowther of The New York Times called her performance "embarrassing to behold".

In September 1954, Monroe began filming The Seven Year Itch in New York. Directed by Billy Wilder and co-starring Tom Ewell, the story focused on a man (Ewell), who begins to fantasize about his attractive neighbor (Monroe) after his wife and children leave him alone in New York for the summer. Although most of the film was going to be shot in a sound stage, the studio decided to generate advance publicity by shooting one of the film's most famous scenes, in which Monroe is standing on a subway grate with the air blowing up the skirt of her white dress, also on location on Lexington Avenue. The filming lasted for several hours as the scene was re-taken several times, and attracted a crowd of nearly 2,000 spectators, including professional photographers. It also angered DiMaggio, from whom Monroe filed for divorce some weeks later, after less than nine months of marriage.
After filming wrapped in November, Monroe began a new battle for control over her career and left Hollywood for the East Coast, where she founded her own production company, Marilyn Monroe Productions (MMP), with photographer Milton Greene – an action that has later been called "instrumental" in the collapse of studio system. They announced the new company with a press conference in early January 1955, and proclaimed that she was no longer under contract with Fox, as the studio had not fulfilled its duties, such as paying her the promised bonus for The Seven Year Itch. This began a year-long legal battle between her and the studio. The press largely ridiculed Monroe for her decision and she was also parodied in Itch writer George Axelrod's stage hit, Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter? (1955), in which her lookalike Jayne Mansfield played a dumb actress who starts her own production company.
In addition to negotiating with the studio and starting her own company, Monroe dedicated 1955 to studying her craft. After staying for a while with Greene and his family in Connecticut, she moved to New York, where she began taking acting classes with Constance Collier and attending workshops on method acting at the Actors Studio, run by Lee Strasberg. She became close to Strasberg and his wife Paula, receiving private lessons at their home due to her shyness and soon becoming "like a family member". She dismissed her old drama coach, Natasha Lytess, and replaced her with Paula, who were to remain an important influence in her career henceforward. In order to remain in the public eye, Monroe arranged publicity for herself throughout the year, such as riding an elephant at the Ringling Brothers Circus Charity Gala in Madison Square Garden, appearing with Greene and his wife Amy in the television program Person to Person, and attending the centennial celebrations of Bement, Illinois, the site of the Lincoln-Douglas debates. The Seven Year Itch was released in June, and became one of the highest-grossing films of the summer.
By the end of the year, Monroe and Fox had come to an agreement. It was clear that MMP was not going to be able to finance films alone, and the studio was eager to have Monroe working again. Under the new seven-year contract, she would be required to make four films for Fox, for each of which she would be paid $100,000. She would now also have the right to choose her projects as well as directors and cinematographers, and to make one film with MMP per each completed film for Fox.


=== Critical acclaim (1956–1959) ===
Monroe began 1956 by announcing her win over 20th Century-Fox, which prompted Time to call her a "shrewd businesswoman", and the first projects of her company, film adaptations of the plays Bus Stop, to be co-produced with Fox, and The Sleeping Prince, which was to be directed and co-starred by Laurence Olivier. She also changed her name officially to Marilyn Monroe in March. Her newest romantic relationship, with playwright Arthur Miller, was also made public that spring, prompting some negative comments from the press, as he was being investigated by the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC). Despite the risk of becoming blacklisted herself, she married him in White Plains, New York on 29 June.

In Bus Stop, her first film after her return to Hollywood, Monroe played Chérie, a talentless saloon singer whose dreams of becoming a star are complicated by a naïve cowboy, played by Don Murray, who falls desperately in love with her. Broadway director Joshua Logan was employed to direct, despite initially doubting her ability to act and knowing of her reputation for being difficult on set. For her role, Monroe learnt an Ozark accent, chose costumes and make-up that lacked the glamour of the costumes of her earlier films, and provided deliberately mediocre singing and dancing. The filming took place in Idaho and Arizona between March and May, and proceeded well after Logan adapted to her tardiness and perfectionism, and allowed her to run the production they way she wanted it. Bus Stop became a box office hit upon its release in August 1956. It also received mainly favorable reviews, with Bosley Crowther of The New York Times proclaiming: "Hold on to your chairs, everybody, and get set for a rattling surprise. Marilyn Monroe has finally proved herself an actress." She received a Golden Globe nomination for her performance.
In August 1956, Monroe began filming MMP's first independent production, The Sleeping Prince, now renamed The Prince and the Showgirl, at Pinewood Studios in England. It was a period film set in 1911, in which she played a show girl who has an affair with the fictional Prince Regent of Carpathia (Olivier), and uncovers a treason plot. Its filming was troubled due to conflicts between Olivier and Monroe. He was frustrated by the state of his career, and angered Monroe by being patronizing to her, telling her "All you have to do is be sexy, dear Marilyn", and by trying to make her play the lead role exactly like Vivien Leigh had done in the stage version. He also disliked the constant presence of Paula Strasberg, her acting coach, on set. In retaliation to Olivier's treatment of her, Monroe started arriving late to work and became difficult to work with. Her drug use also increased during the production and she possibly had a miscarriage. Other conflicts also took place: she clashed with Greene over the running of MMP and whether Miller should join it, and Greene and Olivier disagreed on who should be named executive producer in the credits. Despite its difficulties, the film was completed on schedule by the end of the year, with the cast members, including Olivier, being happy with her performance. The Prince and the Showgirl was released in June 1957, receiving mixed reviews and proving unpopular with the audiences in the United States. It was however better received in Europe, where she received the Italian David di Donatello and the French Crystal Star awards, and was nominated for a BAFTA.
After completing The Prince and the Showgirl, Monroe took an 18-month hiatus from work, focusing instead on married life with Miller in New York, Long Island and Connecticut. When she and Greene could not settle their conflicts over MMP, she dismissed him and bought out his share of the company.

Monroe returned to Hollywood in July 1958 to play the female lead, singer Sugar Kane, in Billy Wilder's comedy Some Like It Hot, about two men (Jack Lemmon and Tony Curtis) who dress as women and join her all-female orchestra after needing to go into hiding after witnessing the Valentine's Day Massacre. In the film, she performed one of her most famous songs, "I Wanna Be Loved by You". The difficulties of the film's production have since become "legendary". Monroe would demand dozens of re-takes, and could not remember her lines or act as Wilder directed; Curtis famously stated that kissing her in a romantic scene was "like kissing Hitler" due to the number of times it had to be re-taken. Biographer Sarah Churchwell has however suggested that the issues stemmed from a power struggle between Wilder, who also had a reputation for being difficult on set, and Monroe on how she should play the role, and that she deliberately ruined several scenes in order to act it her way. In the end, he was happy with her performance, stating: "Anyone can remember lines, but it takes a real artist to come on the set and not know her lines and yet give the performance she did!" Despite the difficulties of its production, when Some Like it Hot was released in March 1959, it became one of the most successful films of the 1950s, and earned Monroe a Golden Globe.


=== Final films (1960–1962) ===
After Some Like It Hot, Monroe took another hiatus from working until late 1959, when she returned to Hollywood to star in the musical comedy Let's Make Love, about an actress whose theater company stages a satire about a billionaire, who by accident ends up being cast playing himself, for 20th Century-Fox. She chose George Cukor to direct and Miller re-wrote portions of the script, which she considered weak; she had only accepted the part because she had so far only made one film out of the four stipulated by her contract with the studio. Fox had difficulties in finding a male star for the role of the billionaire, eventually casting French star Yves Montand, who had not previously acted in American films. The filming was again complicated by Monroe's behavior, and her absences caused its production schedule to be delayed. While working on the film, she and Montand had an affair, which was widely reported by the press and used by the studio in the film's publicity campaign. Let's Make Love flopped upon its released in September 1960.

The last film that Monroe completed was The Misfits, based on a short story that Miller had developed into a screenplay with the idea of providing her with a role in a drama. Directed by John Huston, it was filmed in the Nevada desert, and focused on the friendship between a recently divorced woman (Monroe) and three aging cowboys, played by Clark Gable, Eli Wallach and Montgomery Clift, who capture mustangs for a living. Its filming between July and November 1960 was complicated by several issues. Monroe and Miller's marriage was effectively over by this time, making working together difficult. She resented her character, which she thought was "less nuanced" than the male roles, and disliked that he had included elements of her life in it. She also struggled with his habit of re-writing scenes the night before filming, forcing her to rehearse through the night. Her health was also failing: she was in pain from gall stones, and her drug addiction was severe by this point, to the extent that her make-up had to usually be applied while she was still asleep under the influence of barbiturates. In August, filming was halted for her to spend a week detoxing in a Los Angeles hospital. Other cast and crew members also struggled: the Nevada heat made filming difficult, Huston spent nights drinking and gambling with the result of sometimes falling asleep on set, and Gable suffered a fatal heart attack only days after completing the film. The Misfits was released in February 1961, receiving mixed reviews and failing at the box office.
Monroe and Miller divorced in early 1961. She had no new projects in 1961, and was preoccupied by her health issues, undergoing surgery for endometriosis and a cholecystectomy, and spending several weeks in two psychiatric hospitals to overcome her issues with addiction and depression. She returned to the public eye in 1962, receiving a "World Film Favorite" Golden Globe award in March and beginning to shoot a new film for 20th Century-Fox, Something's Got to Give, a re-make of My Favorite Wife (1940), on April 23. It was to be co-produced by MMP, directed by George Cukor and co-starred by Dean Martin and Cyd Charisse. Monroe was absent for the first two weeks of filming, officially due to the flu; biographers have also attributed her absence to sinusitis or her ongoing drug addiction. On May 19, she took a break from filming to sing "Happy Birthday" on stage at president John F. Kennedy's birthday celebration at the Madison Square Garden in New York, attracting attention with her costume: a beige, skintight dress covered in rhinestones which made her appear nude. After returning to work, she filmed a scene in which she swam naked in a swimming pool. To generate advance publicity, the press were invited to take photographs of the scene, which were later published in Life; this was the first time that a major star had posed naked during their heyday. When she was again absent from filming for several days, the studio fired her on June 7 and sued her for breach of contract, demanding $750,000 in damages. She was replaced with Lee Remick, but after Martin refused to make the film with anyone other than Monroe, Fox sued him as well and shut down the production.

The studio publicly blamed Monroe's drug addiction and alleged lack of professionalism for the demise of the film, even claiming that she was mentally disturbed. Their version remained largely uncontested until 1990, when the surviving footage from Something's Got to Give was released, showing that unlike the studio had claimed, when Monroe had shown up on set, she had been coherent and able to film several scenes. According to a later statement by the film's producer Henry Weinstein, her dismissal was linked to 20th Century-Fox's severe financial issues, resulting from loss of audiences due to television and the production of Cleopatra (1963), as well as the inexperience of head executive of Peter Levathes, rather than solely caused by her being difficult to work with.
To counter the negative publicity, Monroe engaged in several publicity ventures after her dismissal. They included an interview with Richard Meryman for Life, a photo shoot by George Barris for Cosmopolitan, and her first photo shoot for Vogue. For the latter publication, Monroe and photographer Bert Stern collaborated for two series of photographs, one a standard fashion editorial, and another of her posing nude, which were both later published posthumously with the title The Last Sitting. According to some biographers and documentary-makers, she was either in negotiations to be re-hired or had already made a new deal with the studio for Something's Got to Give in the final weeks of her life, and was also in talks about other possible film roles.


== Personal life ==

Monroe had three marriages, all of which ended in divorce. The first, soon after she turned 16, was to James Dougherty, a sheet-metal worker five years her senior. They married in June 1942, six months after the U.S. entered World War II. He chose to enlist the following year, becoming a Marine trainer, which left Monroe home alone and bored. They divorced after he returned from serving in Asia in 1946. She later blamed her legal guardian, Grace McKee, for encouraging her to marry him while she was still very young.
Her second marriage was to Joe DiMaggio, a retired baseball star with the New York Yankees, and took place on January 14, 1954 at San Francisco City Hall. Arguments related to mental cruelty, jealousy and fame ended their marriage later that same year. Monroe later commented: "He was jealous of me because I was more famous than he was. That is what ended our marriage." Other biographers also noted that DiMaggio's jealousy resulted from his possessiveness and his worries about Monroe's possible marital infidelity.

In June 1956 she married playwright and screenwriter Arthur Miller, who would later write two of her films' screenplays. They first met in 1950 during the filming of Bus Stop, and began seeing one another a year after her divorce from DiMaggio. Months later, Miller was called to testify before the House Un-American Activities Committee to explain his supposed communist affiliations. Monroe was urged by studio executives to abandon Miller rather than risk her career, but she refused, calling them "born cowards". When they married, one headline announced, "Egghead Weds Hourglass."
Monroe had just turned 30 when they married, and never having a real family of her own, she was eager to join the family of her new husband. Monroe chose to convert to Judaism to "express her loyalty and get close to both Miller and his parents", writes biographer Jeffrey Meyers. Monroe explained to her close friend, Susan Strasberg: "I can identify with the Jews. Everybody's always out to get them, no matter what they do, like me." After she became Jewish, Egypt retaliated by banning all her movies. They divorced five years later after they completed The Misfits (1961), which Miller wrote and Monroe starred in, due to ongoing personality conflicts.
Director Billy Wilder, who described Monroe as "Cinderella without the happy ending", tried to sum up her marriage problems. He directed her in The Seven Year Itch, when she was married to DiMaggio, and in Some Like It Hot, when she was married to Miller:

Her marriages didn't work out because Joe DiMaggio found out she was Marilyn Monroe, and Arthur Miller found out she wasn't Marilyn Monroe.

Monroe's other relationships have garnered much press. The extent of a relationship between President Kennedy and Monroe will never be known, although the White House switchboard did note calls from her during 1962. In the opinion of one writer, Monroe was in love with President Kennedy and wanted to marry him, and when their affair ended, she turned to Robert Kennedy, who reportedly visited Monroe in Los Angeles the day that she died.
Monroe had a long experience with psychoanalysis. She was in analysis with Margaret Herz Hohenberg, Anna Freud, Marianne Rie Kris, Ralph Greenson (who found Monroe dead), and Milton Wexler.


== Death and aftermath ==

On August 5, 1962, at 4:25 a.m., LAPD sergeant Jack Clemmons received a call from Dr. Ralph Greenson, Monroe's psychiatrist, saying that Monroe was found dead at her home at 12305 Fifth Helena Drive in Brentwood, Los Angeles, California. She was 36 years old. At the subsequent autopsy, 8 mg/dL of chloral hydrate and 4.5 mg/dL of Nembutal were found in her system, and Dr. Thomas Noguchi (known as the "coroner to the stars") of the Los Angeles County Coroners office recorded cause of death as "acute barbiturate poisoning", resulting from a "probable suicide". Many theories, including murder, circulated about the circumstances of her death and the timeline after the body was found. Some conspiracy theories involved John and Robert Kennedy, while other theories suggested CIA or Mafia complicity. It was reported that President Kennedy was the last person Monroe called.
Monroe was interred on August 8, 1962, in a crypt at Corridor of Memories No. 24, at the Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery in Los Angeles. Joe DiMaggio took control of the funeral arrangements, which consisted of only 31 close family and friends, excluding Hollywood's elite. Lee Strasberg, her acting teacher, delivered the eulogy, and had once claimed that of all his acting students, she was the one who stood out above the rest, second only to Marlon Brando. As part of her eulogy, he stated:

In her eyes, and in mine, her career was just beginning.... She had a luminous quality. A combination of wistfulness, radiance, and yearning that set her apart and made everyone wish to be part of it—to share in the childish naivete which was at once so shy and yet so vibrant.

Police were also present to keep the press away. Her casket was silver finished solid bronze and was lined with champagne colored silk. Allan "Whitey" Snyder did her make-up, which was supposedly a promise made in earlier years if she were to die before him. She was wearing her favorite green Emilio Pucci dress. In her hands was a small bouquet of pink teacup roses. For the next 20 years, red roses were placed in a vase attached to the crypt, courtesy of DiMaggio.
In 1992, Playboy magazine founder Hugh Hefner, who never met Monroe, bought the crypt immediately to the left of hers at the Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery. Beyond the fact that she was Playboy's first cover model and first centerfold, Hefner said he "felt a kinship" with Monroe. They had both been born the same year, his brother had been in one of her New York acting classes, and before her death Monroe had approved stills from her last film for a Playboy anniversary issue.
In August 2009, the crypt space directly above that of Monroe was placed for auction on eBay. Elsie Poncher planned to exhume her husband and move him to an adjacent plot. She advertised the crypt, hoping "to make enough money to pay off the $1.6 million mortgage" on her Beverly Hills mansion. The winning bid was placed by an anonymous Japanese man for $4.6 million, but the winning bidder later backed out "because of the paying problem".


=== Administration of estate ===

In her will, Monroe stated she would leave Lee Strasberg her personal effects, which amounted to just over half of her residuary estate, expressing her desire that he "distribute [the effects] among my friends, colleagues and those to whom I am devoted". Instead, Strasberg stored them in a warehouse, and willed them to his widow, Anna, who successfully sued Los Angeles-based Odyssey Auctions in 1994 to prevent the sale of items consigned by the nephew of Monroe's business manager, Inez Melson. In October 1999, Christie's auctioned the bulk of Monroe's effects, including those recovered from Melson's nephew, netting an amount of $13,405,785. Subsequently, Strasberg sued the children of four photographers to determine rights of publicity, which permits the licensing of images of deceased personages for commercial purposes. The decision as to whether Monroe was a resident of California, where she died and where her will was probated, or New York, which she considered her primary residence, was worth millions.
On May 4, 2007, a New York judge ruled that Monroe's rights of publicity ended at her death. In October 2007, California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger signed Senate Bill 771. The legislation, supported by Anna Strasberg and the Screen Actors Guild, established that non-family members may inherit rights of publicity through the residuary clause of the deceased's will, provided that the person was a resident of California at the time of death. In March 2008, the United States District Court in Los Angeles ruled that Monroe was a resident of New York at the time of her death, citing the statement of the executor of her estate to California tax authorities, and a 1966 affidavit by her housekeeper. The decision was reaffirmed by the United States District Court of New York in September 2008.
In July 2010, Monroe's Brentwood home was put up for sale by Prudential California Realty. The house was sold for $3.6 million. Monroe left to Lee Strasberg an archive of her own writing—diaries, poems, and letters, which Anna discovered in October 1999. In October 2010, the documents were published as a book, Fragments (ISBN 0-00-739534-5).


== Portrayals ==


=== Film ===
Monroe has been portrayed by:
Misty Rowe in Goodbye Norma Jeane (a highly fictionalized telling of Marilyn's early years) (1976)
Catherine Hicks in Marilyn: The Untold Story (1980)
Linda Kerridge plays a Monroe look-alike in the horror film Fade to Black (1980)
Theresa Russell in Insignificance, where an unnamed Monroe goes to a fictional meeting with Albert Einstein, Joseph McCarthy, and husband Joe DiMaggio (1985)
Susan Griffiths is a Marilyn Monroe impersonator who has either portrayed Monroe or a look-alike, in the biopic Marilyn & Me (1991), in the 1994 film Pulp Fiction, and in the TV series Quantum Leap, Dark Skies, Curb Your Enthusiasm and Timecop
Melody Anderson in Marilyn & Bobby: Her Final Affair (1993)
Ashley Judd as the younger Marilyn, and by Mira Sorvino as the older Marilyn in the film Norma Jean & Marilyn (1996)
Barbara Niven in The Rat Pack (1998)
Kerri Randles in Introducing Dorothy Dandridge (1999)
Poppy Montgomery in Blonde (2001)
Holly Beavon in James Dean (2001)
Sophie Monk in The Mystery of Natalie Wood (2004)
Samantha Morton plays a Marilyn Monroe impersonator in Mister Lonely (2007)
Michelle Williams in My Week with Marilyn (2011)


=== Television ===
Monroe has been portrayed by:
Constance Forslund in This Year's Blonde (1980)
Suzie Kennedy impersonated Marilyn Monroe in the episode Who Killed Marilyn Monroe? (2003) of the TV series Revealed and in the Italian movie Io & Marilyn (2009)
Charlotte Sullivan in The Kennedys (2011)
Megan Hilty, Uma Thurman and Katharine McPhee play actresses who portray Monroe in the TV series Smash (2012–13).
Kelli Garner in The Secret Life of Marilyn Monroe (2015)


=== Theatre ===
Monroe has been portrayed by:
Laura Aikin in Robin de Raaff's opera Waiting for Miss Monroe (2012)
Sunny Thompson in the one woman production Marilyn: Forever Blonde
Eivør Pálsdóttir in Gavin Bryars' opera Marilyn Forever


=== Arts ===

Monroe has been depicted by numerous painters and pop artists:
Willem de Kooning: Marilyn Monroe, 1954
James Gill: Marilyn Triptych, 1962
James Rosenquist: Marilyn Monroe I, 1962
Mimmo Rotella: Marilyn Monroe, 1962
Wolf Vostell: Marilyn Monroe, 1962
Andy Warhol: Marilyn Diptych, 1962
Richard Hamilton: My Marilyn, 1966
Salvador Dalí: Mao Monroe, 1967
Robert Rauschenberg: Test Stone #1, 1967
George Segal: The Film Poster, 1967
Richard Lindner: Marilyn was here, 1970
Ray Johnson: Dear Marilyn Monroe, 1972–1994 and Dear Marilyn Monroe, To Chuck Close, 1980–1994
Audrey Flack: Marilyn: Golden Girl, 1978
Richard Serra: Marilyn Monroe–Greta Garbo, 1981
Gottfried Helnwein: Boulevard of Broken Dreams, 1984
Peter Blake: Marilyn Monroe Over a Painting No 1, 1989–1990,
Douglas Gordon: As Kurt Cobain, as Andy Warhol, as Myra Hindley, as Marilyn Monroe, 1996
Barbara Kruger: Not Stupid Enough, 1997
Mel Ramos: Peek-a-boo Marilyn, 2002
Gina Lollobrigida: My Friend Marilyn Monroe, 2003


=== Music ===
Monroe has been portrayed by:
Lorenzo Ferrero in the opera Marilyn (1980)
Madonna in the Material Girl music video (1985)
Mariah Carey in her music video "I Still Believe" (1998)
Mariah Carey in her music video "Don't Forget About Us" (2005). She portrays Marilyn Monroe from the pool scene of the unfinished 1962 film Something's Got To Give.
Lana del Rey in "National Anthem" (2012)


== Tributes ==
Troy Talton and Donald Kinder wrote a song, entitled "Marilyn", in honor of Marilyn after her death in 1962. It was recorded by Talton and released as a single by Crest Records.
Elton John (music) and Bernie Taupin (lyrics) wrote another song in her honor, "Candle in the Wind".
Glenn Danzig of the American rock band The Misfits (who were named after Monroe's final film) released a song named "Who Killed Marilyn?" in 1981.


== Filmography ==


== Discography ==


=== "When I Fall In Love" ===
Contrary to popular belief, Monroe did not ever record the song "When I Fall In Love". The version widely attributed to her and included on many compilation CDs was actually recorded in 1960 by actress Sandra Dee.


== Awards and nominations ==
1951 Henrietta Award: The Best Young Box Office Personality
1952 Photoplay Award: Fastest Rising Star of 1952
1952 Photoplay Award: Special Award
1952 Look American Magazine Achievement Award: Most Promising Female Newcomer of 1952
1953 Golden Globe Henrietta Award: World Film Favorite Female.
1953 Sweetheart of the Month (Playboy)
1953 Photoplay Award: Most Popular Female Star
1954 Photoplay Award for Best Actress: for Gentlemen Prefer Blondes and How to Marry a Millionaire
1956 BAFTA Film Award nomination: Best Foreign Actress for The Seven Year Itch
1956 Golden Globe nomination: Best Motion Picture Actress in Comedy or Musical for Bus Stop
1958 BAFTA Film Award nomination: Best Foreign Actress for The Prince and the Showgirl
1958 David di Donatello Award (Italian): Best Foreign Actress for The Prince and the Showgirl
1959 Crystal Star Award (French): Best Foreign Actress for The Prince and the Showgirl
1960 Star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame 6104 Hollywood Blvd.
1960 Golden Globe, Best Motion Picture Actress in Comedy or Musical for Some Like It Hot
1962 Golden Globe, World Film Favorite: Female
1995 and 2012 (re-dedication) Palm Springs, California, Golden Palm Star – Palm Springs Walk of Stars
1999 she was ranked as the sixth greatest female star of all time by the American Film Institute in their list AFI's 100 Years...100 Stars.


== Notes ==


== References ==


=== Footnotes ===


=== Sources ===


== External links ==
Official website by the Estate of Marilyn Monroe LLC
Marilyn Monroe at the Internet Movie Database
Marilyn Monroe at the TCM Movie Database
Marilyn Monroe at Playboy Online
Works by or about Marilyn Monroe in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
Monroe's file at the Federal Bureau of Investigation website
Marilyn Monroe at Find A Grave
Galleries: Marilyn Monroe: Life magazine covers & articles & Marilyn Monroe: Rare Early Photos, 1950 —Life magazine