Melania Trump
Melania Knauss-Trump (born Melanija Knavs, Germanized to Melania Knauss; April 26, 1970) is a Slovenian former model and the wife of American real estate magnate Donald Trump. They married January 22, 2005.


== Personal life ==
Knauss was born in Sevnica, in Slovenia's Lower Sava Valley (then part of Yugoslavia) in 1970. Her father, Viktor Knavs, was from the nearby town of Radeče, while her mother, Amalija, came from a village in the area surrounding Sevnica, within the confounds of Sevnica Castle.
She met Donald Trump in the late 1990s. Knauss's relationship with Trump grew as she launched her modeling career, and also became involved with the social set of New York. Their relationship received increasing publicity after the launch of Trump's successful business-oriented reality television show, The Apprentice.
Trump and Knauss became engaged in 2004, and married January 22, 2005, at The Episcopal Church of Bethesda-by-the-Sea in Palm Beach, Florida, followed by a reception in the 17,000-sq.-ft. ballroom at Trump's Mar-A-Lago estate, which was attended by Katie Couric, Matt Lauer, Rudy Giuliani, Star Jones, Barbara Walters, Regis Philbin, Kelly Ripa, and Billy Joel, who serenaded the crowd with "Just the Way You Are" and made up punning lyrics about Trump to the tune of "The Lady and the Tramp". As a guest of Donald Trump, Hillary Clinton attended the wedding.
Their wedding ceremony was widely covered by the media, with the fact that Knauss wore a $200,000 dress made by the house of Christian Dior often mentioned. The cake at the reception was a 50-pound orange Grand Marnier cake with a Grand Marnier butter-cream filling, covered with 3,000 roses, constructed by the chef at Mar-A-Lago.
On March 20, 2006 Knauss gave birth to a boy, whom the couple named Barron William Trump. Donald Trump made the announcement via phone on the Imus in the Morning show about 20 minutes after birth, stating that "everyone's perfect." He was Trump's fifth child.
Melania has a sister Ines, who is also beautiful woman. However, both sisters are, according to Melania, put to shame by the beauty of their mother Amalija.


== Career ==
After studying design and architecture at the University of Ljubljana, she started working as a model both in Milan and Paris before settling in New York City in 1996. She was on the cover of Vogue, Harper's Bazaar, Ocean Drive, In Style, New York Magazine, Avenue, Allure, Vanity Fair, Self, Glamour, Elle, and appeared in the 2000 Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue.
She appeared on The Howard Stern Show with Trump. This led to a layout in British GQ magazine, including the cover shot in January 2000. Monetizing her increased celebrity status after the 2005 wedding, Knauss appeared in a television advertisement for Aflac insurance, in which she and the Aflac mascot, a duck, voiced by comedian Gilbert Gottfried, exchange personalities via a Frankenstein-like mad experiment.
In February 2010, Knauss announced the launch of a jewellery collection with QVC.


== References ==


== External links ==
Melania's official website
Melania Trump at the Internet Movie Database