Miles Teller
Miles Alexander Teller (born February 20, 1987) is an American actor and musician. He made his feature film debut in Rabbit Hole (2010). Since then, he has acted in Footloose (2011), Project X (2012), and That Awkward Moment (2014).
Teller had the lead roles in critically acclaimed films The Spectacular Now (2013) and Whiplash (2014). He portrayed Peter Hayes in the commercially successful The Divergent Series, starred as Reed Richards / Mister Fantastic in the film Fantastic Four (2015), and will headline the upcoming biopic Bleed for This (2015), playing boxer Vinny Paz.


== Early life and education ==
Teller was born in Downingtown, Pennsylvania, the son of Merry (née Flowers), a real estate agent, and Mike Teller (born 1954), a nuclear power plant engineer. His parents are from Carneys Point, New Jersey. He has two older sisters, Erin and Dana. His paternal grandfather was of Russian Jewish descent, while his other ancestry is English, Irish, Polish, and French.
He lived in several places as a child, because of his father's career, spending time in Citrus County, Florida, after moving from Cape May, New Jersey. He also lived in Pennsylvania and Delaware. Teller attended Lecanto High School, Florida, where he played the saxophone, was a drummer for a church youth group band, and was president of the drama club. He can also play piano and guitar and was on the baseball team, hoping to turn professional. Aside from high school, Teller worked as a server at a restaurant called Crackers. He earned a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree from Tisch School of the Arts at New York University, where he studied method acting at the Lee Strasberg Theatre and Film Institute.


== Career ==

Before making his feature film debut Teller appeared in many short films. After graduating from Tisch School of Arts in 2009, he made his debut in 2010's Rabbit Hole, after Nicole Kidman handpicked him for the role. Teller appeared in the stage musical Footloose in high school. Years later, he was cast in the film remake of Footloose (2011) starring Kenny Wormald, in which he played the same character as in his high school musical.
In 2013, he starred in 21 & Over, written and directed by Jon Lucas and Scott Moore. That year, he began reaching critical success after starring in the James Ponsoldt film, The Spectacular Now, for which he won the Dramatic Special Jury Award for Acting at the 2013 Sundance Film Festival, with co-star Shailene Woodley.
Also in 2013, he appeared in an in-depth interview and photo shoot in Hero magazine. In 2014, he co-starred in the comedy That Awkward Moment, alongside Zac Efron and Michael B. Jordan, appeared in the science fiction film Divergent, co-starring again with Shailene Woodley, and starred as a drummer in the well-reviewed drama Whiplash (2014), which premiered at the 2014 Sundance Film Festival and opened in theaters in October 2014. Whiplash won Best Film Editing, Best Sound Mixing, and Best Supporting Actor for J.K. Simmons, and was nominated for Best Adapted Screenplay and Best Picture at the 87th Academy Awards.
In 2015, Teller received a nomination for the BAFTA Rising Star Award. He reprised his role of Peter Hayes in The Divergent Series: Insurgent (2015), which was released on March 20, 2015.
In 2015, he starred in a new film version of the Fantastic Four, as Mister Fantastic, alongside Jamie Bell, Michael B. Jordan and Kate Mara. He will star in the upcoming film Bleed for This (2015) with Aaron Eckhart and Katey Sagal, as boxer Vinny Paz. In February 2015, it was announced that Teller would join Jonah Hill in the Todd Phillips directed film Arms and the Dudes (2016). In January 2014, Teller was also cast to portray Dan Aykroyd in Steven Conrad's untitled John Belushi biopic.


== Personal life ==
In 2007, Teller was in a near-fatal car accident, leaving him with multiple scars on his face and neck. Since 2013, he has been in a relationship with model Keleigh Sperry.


== Filmography ==


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Miles Teller at the Internet Movie Database
Miles Teller on Twitter