Orange Is the New Black
Orange Is the New Black (often abbreviated to OITNB) is an American comedy-drama series created by Jenji Kohan and first released on Netflix on July 11, 2013. The series, produced by Tilted Productions in association with Lionsgate Television, is based on Piper Kerman's memoir, Orange Is the New Black: My Year in a Women's Prison (2010), about her experiences at FCI Danbury. The second season, consisting of 13 episodes, was released on June 6, 2014. The third season, consisting of 13 episodes, premiered on June 11, 2015. On April 15, 2015, the series was renewed for a fourth season, scheduled to premiere in 2016. The series has received critical acclaim and earned 12 Primetime Emmy Award nominations for its first season, including Outstanding Comedy Series, and four for its second season, including Outstanding Drama Series (the series moved categories from comedy to drama).


== Plot ==

The series revolves around Piper Chapman (Taylor Schilling), a woman in her thirties living in New York City, who is sentenced to 15 months in Litchfield Penitentiary, a run-down, minimum security womens' federal prison (operated by the "Federal Department of Corrections", a fictionalized version of the Federal Bureau of Prisons) in upstate New York. Piper has been convicted of transporting a suitcase full of drug money to her now former girlfriend Alex Vause (Laura Prepon), an international drug smuggler/mule. The offense had occurred 10 years prior to the start of the series, and in that time Piper had moved on to a quiet, law-abiding life among New York's upper middle class, so her sudden and unexpected arrest seriously disrupts her relationships with her fiancé, family and friends.
In prison, Piper is reunited with Alex (who named Piper in her trial, resulting in Piper's arrest), and they re-examine their relationship and deal with their fellow prisoners. The show often shows flashbacks of significant events from various inmates' and prison guards' pasts. These flashbacks typically explain how the inmate came to be in prison or otherwise further develop the character's backstory - the majority of the characters featured are in prison on non-violent offences, most of them related to narcotics, fraud and larceny, although some are in prison on organised crime, homicide and aggravated assault charges. The show also reveals the abuse of power portrayed by some correctional officers upon female inmates and their corrupt actions of drug trafficking. As the series has continued, the focus on Piper has lessened, so that many inmates form an ensemble cast with many concurrent plot themes.


== Cast and characters ==


=== Main cast ===


=== Recurring cast ===


== Production ==
In July 2011, the media announced that Lionsgate Television and Netflix were negotiating adding Orange Is the New Black, based on Piper Kerman's memoir, to the Netflix original series lineup. Netflix finalized the deal as a 13-episode straight-to-Web series. Casting announcements began in August 2012 with Taylor Schilling, the first to be cast, in the lead role as Piper Chapman, followed by Jason Biggs as Piper's fiancé Larry Bloom.
Laura Prepon and Yael Stone were next to join the series, along with Laverne Cox, a black transgender woman, as Sophia Burset, a transgender character. The Advocate touted Orange Is the New Black as possibly the first women-in-prison narrative to cast a transgender woman for this type of role. This American Life host Ira Glass was offered a role as a public radio host, but he declined. The role instead went to Robert Stanton, who plays the fictional host Maury Kind.
The series is set in a fictional prison in Litchfield, New York, which is a real town in upstate New York, but it does not have a Federal Penitentiary. The series began filming in the old Rockland Children's Psychiatric Center in Rockland County, New York on March 7, 2013.
On June 27, 2013, prior to the series premiere, Netflix renewed the show for a second season consisting of 13 episodes. For the second season, Uzo Aduba, Taryn Manning, Danielle Brooks and Natasha Lyonne were promoted to series regulars. Laura Prepon did not return as a series regular for a second season because of scheduling conflicts, however, returned for season 3 as a regular. On May 5, 2014, the series was renewed for a third season, as revealed by actress Laura Prepon. For the third season, several actors were promoted to series regulars, including Selenis Leyva, Adrienne C. Moore, Dascha Polanco, Nick Sandow, Yael Stone and Samira Wiley. Both Jason Biggs and Pablo Schreiber were confirmed as not returning for the third season, however, Schreiber appeared in the tenth episode of the third season. The series was renewed for a fourth season on April 15, 2015, prior to its third season premiere. For the fourth season, Jackie Cruz and Lea DeLaria will be promoted to series regulars.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===

Orange Is the New Black has received critical acclaim. For the first season, Metacritic gave it a score of 79 out of 100 based on reviews from 32 critics, indicating favorable reviews. Rotten Tomatoes gave it a score of 93%, with an average rating of 8.2 out of 10 based on 40 reviews. The site's consensus is "Orange Is the New Black is a sharp mix of black humor and dramatic heft, with interesting characters and an intriguing flashback structure."
Hank Stuever, television critic for The Washington Post, gave Orange Is the New Black a perfect score. In his review of the series, he stated: "In Jenji Kohan's magnificent and thoroughly engrossing new series, Orange Is the New Black, prison is still the pits. But it is also filled with the entire range of human emotion and stories, all of which are brought vividly to life in a world where a stick of gum could ignite either a romance or a death threat." Maureen Ryan, of The Huffington Post, wrote: "Orange is one of the best new programs of the year, and the six episodes I've seen have left me hungry to see more."
The second season also received critical acclaim. Rotten Tomatoes gave a score of 97%, with an average rating of 9.1 out of 10 based on 36 reviews. The site's consensus reads: "With a talented ensemble cast bringing life to a fresh round of serial drama, Orange Is the New Black's sophomore season lives up to its predecessor's standard for female-led television excellence. Metacritic gave the second season a score of 89 out of 100 based on 31 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". David Wiegland of the San Francisco Chronicle gave the season a positive review, calling the first six episodes "not only as great as the first season, but arguably better."
The third season received critical acclaim. On Metacritic, it has a score of 84 out of 100 based on 21 reviews. On Rotten Tomatoes, it has an 94% rating with an average score of 8.4 out of 10 based on 33 reviews. The site's consensus reads: "Thanks to its blend of potent comedy and rich character work, Orange is the New Black remains a bittersweet pleasure in its third season."


=== Ratings ===
Orange Is the New Black generated more viewers and hours viewed in its first week than the other Netflix original series House of Cards and Arrested Development.


=== Accolades ===


== International broadcast ==
The series began airing on broadcast television in New Zealand on TV2 on August 19, 2013. It premiered in Australia on October 9, 2013, on Showcase. The second season began on Showcase on July 16, 2014, and the third season premiered on June 11, 2015.


== See also ==
Women in Prison
Incarceration in the United States


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Berlatsky, Noah (June 3, 2014). "A Lewd Reminder of How Tame Orange Is the New Black Really Is: Jonathan Demme's Caged Heat, 40 this year, showed the radical political potential—and, yes, sexually exploitative side—of the women-in-prison genre". The Atlantic. 
Weatherford Millette, Sarah. "The Representation of Latinas in Orange Is the New Black." MA Thesis. George Mason University, 2015.


== External links ==
Orange Is the New Black on Netflix
Orange Is the New Black at the Internet Movie Database