Pretty Little Liars (season 6)
The sixth season of the American mystery drama television series Pretty Little Liars, based on the books of the same name by Sara Shepard, was renewed on June 10, 2014 for two additional seasons, making the show ABC Family's longest running original series.
The sixth and seventh season will consist of 20 episodes each. It will begin airing 10 episodes for the first half the season, which began airing on June 2, 2015. Filming for the sixth season began on March 24, 2015, which was confirmed by showrunner I. Marlene King on Twitter. The season premiere was written by I. Marlene King and Lijah J. Barasz and was directed by Chad Lowe. The title of the premiere, "Game On, Charles", was revealed by King after the fifth season finale. Unlike previous seasons, the sixth season will not include a special holiday-themed episode between the first and second half of the season, just like the first season. Previous holiday-themed episodes have been the thirteenth episode of each previous season excluding the first season.
ABC Family promoted the sixth season by creating an online contest in which fans of the show could be a part of the marketing campaign to promote the show by sending in their art for consideration. The promotional poster was released on May 21, 2015 which was included in the June/July cover of Seventeen. ABC Family promoted the season by calling it "Summer of Answers".


== Overview ==
After trying to escape the dollhouse in the season five finale, 'A' punishes Emily, Hanna, Spencer, Aria, and Mona, subjecting them to various types of torture. Meanwhile, Alison, Ezra, Caleb, and Toby try to find a way to help find the girls. Andrew becomes a suspect after being reported missing. After finding out how their families have been affected with the incident (and Charles' plan to have the real Alison in the dollhouse), the Liars hatch a plan to get out of the dollhouse. The plan worked successfully, and Emily, Hanna, Spencer, Aria, and Mona managed to escape from 'A's dollhouse with the help of Alison, Ezra, Caleb, and Toby. They are safely rescued and brought back home. Subsequently, Andrew is arrested and accused of kidnapping the girls. However, the girls are far from okay, as they all deal with the lasting effects of being held hostage. Another girl, Sara Harvey, who went missing the same time Ali did, is found in the dollhouse as well, reportedly having been held there for two years. Unable to deal with her home life, she runs away and comes to Emily, where she and her mother agree that she can stay with them for a while. Meanwhile, Ali tries to get answers out of her dad about Charles DiLaurentis, but he insists there is no one of that name in their family. Jason later tells Spencer that Charles or "Charlie" was his imaginary friend when he was little, before his dad told him Charlie had to go away. It is revealed that Andrew is not 'A', after a threatening text is sent to the Liars while Andrew was being held in custody. An angry Andrew reveals to Aria that he had been trying to help the girls; the girls now realize that Charles is still out there.
After discovering a photo of Mrs. Dilaurentis with Jason and another boy, Alison and Jason found out that they had an older brother that was, in fact, Charles. Kenneth explains that Charles tried to hurt Alison when she was a kid, and was subsequently admitted to Radley for diagnosis. He also said that Charles died when Ali was 16. Alison relays this information to the girls, and they immediately searched Radley for answers. They later discovered that there was another another person who visited Charles in Radley: Jessica's sister, Carol, who died when the girls were in tenth grade. Continuing their search for answers about Charles, Alison, Jason, Hanna, and Spencer later discovered Charles' grave behind Carol's house; they now believe that 'A' was using Charles' identity. Mona returns to Rosewood in a fragile state, heavily questioned by the police for her actions. Lesli, Mona's friend, is angry at her, believing her reputation is in jeopardy because of Mona. Hanna and Spencer later found out from Mona that Lesli was a former patient at Radley, and she was roommates with Bethany. This discovery led the girls to suspect that Lesli is 'A', until Mona tells them that Lesli is only pretending to be stable and that Charles faked his own death.
When the girls found out that Charles was coming to the Dilaurentis household (for his birthday), Hanna and Spencer planned on catching him, while Emily and Aria simply wanted to be away from him. Charles sent a note to Jason, telling him to meet him at an arcade. The girls discover the note, and they followed Jason to the arcade (unbeknownst to Jason). After getting a call from Alison, the police followed Jason and the liars to the arcade, but were unable to catch Charles. Rosewood High then considered not allowing the girls to prom and graduation following this event, and an incident at Aria's photo gallery contest ultimately led to the school's decision to ultimately ban the girls from these events. The girls are distraught with the decision. Hanna, after discovering that the scholarship she got is affiliated with Radley (and Mrs. Dilaurentis), decides to return the money in hopes of finding out Charles' identity. She and Spencer meet Rhys Matthews, whom they noticed to have an uncanny resemblance to Jason, leading them to suspect that he is Charles. They also became suspicious of Aria's friend Clark, believing that he may be working for Charles when they saw him following Rhys into a warehouse. However, is later revealed that Clark is an undercover agent. The girls head over to the prom (despite being banned) when they discover that Alison was going to meet Charles there. At the prom, Charles kidnaps Alison and reveals his identity to her, much to Alison's shock.
Cece reveals herself as Charles, Alison's and Jason's older brother/sister. Cece explained the events from her perspective, telling her that she loved Alison all along and that their dad didn't see things that way. She also explained the events that led to Mrs Cavanaugh's death, her relationship with Bethany and her subsequent death, the events on the night Alison disappeared, the deal she made with Mona, the events at the burning lodge, the events in New York, and their mother's death. Mrs. Dilaurentis renamed her as Charlotte, and she went under the name Cece Drake (while at UPenn). She explained that she did all those things to be closer to her family. Sara is then revealed to be Red Coat and Black Widow, working under Cece's orders, leaving Emily distraught. Cece tries to escape (after her bomb attempt fails), but Alison and the girls stopped her, saying they now understood why she became 'A'.


== Cast and characters ==


== Episodes ==


== Casting ==

The sixth season had nine roles receiving star billing, with all of them returning from the previous season, seven of which was part of the original cast from the first season. The season saw the four protagonists of the series continue the roles, as they struggle with PTSD after being held prisoners in 'A's dollhouse. Troian Bellisario played Spencer Hastings, who begins to smoke pot for her sleeping troubles. Ashley Benson played Hanna Marin, who begins to distance herself from Caleb after he becomes overly protecting of her, and tries to figure out who Charles is with help from Spencer. Lucy Hale continued her role as Aria Montgomery, who begins to form a friendship with a photographer named Clark after wanting to distract herself from the events in the dollhouse. Shay Mitchell portrayed Emily Fields who begins to form a relationship with Sara Harvey. Sasha Pieterse continued to portray Alison DiLaurentis as Alison forms a relationship with a police officer named Lorenzo at the same time as she struggles with family drama regarding Charles. Janel Parrish returned as Mona Vanderwaal who must manage the pressure from the police about faking her death in addition to helping Lesli Stone. Tyler Blackburn continues to play Caleb Rivers who becomes more protective of Hanna and begins to feel isolated from the girls, and Ian Harding also continued his role as Ezra Fitz, who becomes closer to a friend of Emily, Nicole. In addition, Laura Leighton played Ashley Marin, Hanna's mom who is very protective of Hanna.
Janel Parrish confirmed in an interview that she would be returning to the sixth season as a series regular after her character, Mona Vanderwaal, was supposedly killed in the mid-season finale of season 5. In the fifth season finale, it was revealed that Mona was alive and had been held prisoner in 'A's dollhouse. Rumer Willis was announced to be returning to the show as Zoe, Emily's coach when she was in Haiti building houses. Rebecca Breeds however, playing another friend of Emily from Haiti named Nicole, replaced Willis' character. It was announced on March 25, 2015, that Project Runway alum Dre Davis was cast as Kimberly Brown. However, it was revealed that Davis will instead be playing Sara Harvey, a girl who went missing the same time as Alison. It was announced on April 21, 2015, that Troian Bellisario's real life best friend Lulu Brud Zsebe would appear on the show as Sabrina, which Bellisario commented "It's a pinch me I'm dreaming scenario."
On April 24, 2015, it was announced that actor Titus Makin Jr. had joined the cast, as his audition playing Lorenzo was leaked, however on May 27, 2015, it was announced that Travis Winfrey will be the one playing Lorenzo, who will be a cop assigned to watch over Alison and also her new love interest. On May 28, 2015, Titus revealed on Twitter that he is going to play Clark Wilkins.
For the second half of the season, several castings was announced, and will appear after the five-year time jump. On June 24, 2015, it was announced that two male recurring characters will be introduced in the second half of the season. The description of the characters was a sophisticated-yet-approachable 27-year-old working in the fashion industry named Jordan, and Liam, a 24-year-old editorial assistant from Boston. On July 21, 2015, it was announced that one more recurring character will be introduced, the smart and sleek Yvonne, a politician's daughter who will cause some major drama for one of the Liars. It was reported by TVLine on June 23, 2015, that Blake Berris will appear in one episode in the second half of the season.


== Production ==
The show was renewed for a sixth and seventh season on June 10, 2014, right before the season five premiere aired, making Pretty Little Liars ABC Family's longest running original series. The sixth and the seventh season will consist of 20 episodes each. Filming for season 6 began on March 24, 2015. It will begin airing 10 episodes for the first half the season, which will begin airing on June 2, 2015. The table read for the premiere occurred on March 23, 2015, King began writing the mid-season finale, the "summer finale", which will be titled "Game Over, Charles", on May 12, 2015.
ABC Family promoted the sixth season by creating a contest in which the fans of the show would be given a chance to help designing a new marketing campaign for the show. After the fifth season finale, fans could send their art to a website, where they would be given a chance to be used in ABC Family's summer ad and campaign. More than 3100 submissions was sent in, and the winner was picked out and was included in the cover of Seventeen on May 21, 2015.
Executive producer Oliver Goldstick revealed in an interview that the first half of the sixth season, would contain 10 episodes instead of 12, like the previous seasons and will deal almost exclusively with the mystery of Charles DiLaurentis and every unanswered "A" mystery question since the start of the show. King said that "This is our chance to finally end this great and wonderful story." In an interview I. Marlene King said that the sixth season will deal with the mystery of Charles DiLaurentis and the "A" mystery. She confirmed that a four year time-jump to after college will be included, and will happen after the first ten episodes. King also confirmed that the sixth season will include the liars graduating from high school. In an interview with Entertainment Online, King said that the sixth season "is about answers and closure for all of them. It is an ending to the story that we started so long ago, but it's a very fast-paced ending to the story." As a regard to the first 10 episodes of the season, executive producer Joseph Dougherty said that they "are going to be like nothing that’s ever happened before on this series. It’s an incredible amount of information in every episode, but if we’ve done the job completely right, you should be able to figure the mystery out just before you find out.
Unlike previous seasons, the sixth season will not include a special holiday-themed episode between the first and second half of the season, just like the first season. Previous holiday-themed episodes have been the thirteenth episode of each previous season excluding the first.


=== Leaks ===
On July 18, 2015, a handful of information regarding the mid-season finale including the reveal of 'A' was allegedly leaked on Reddit. The person behind the account claimed to have been fired after being a PA at the set of Pretty Little Liars after failing a drug test, and could therefore reveal information about the show. Showrunner I. Marlene King took to Instagram where she posted a picture where she reassured the audience that the claims was false and that the identity of 'A' had not been leaked. ABC Family responded to the leaks as they stated: “All of the info on the site is false. No crew member was fired from PLL and we believe it is just a fan spreading incorrect information to rile up the fan base.”


== Reception ==
The sixth season was met with positive reviews from critics and fans. The season premiere was down from the previous premiere and down from the season five finale, with a 1.1 at the target 18–49 demographic and 2.38 total viewers, making it the least watched season premiere in the show's history.


=== Live + SD Ratings ===


== References ==