Republican Party presidential debates, 2016
The 2016 Republican presidential debates will occur among candidates for the Republican Party's presidential nomination for the national election of 2016.


== RNC debates ==
The Republican National Committee announced the 2015–2016 debate schedule on January 16, 2015. It revealed that only 12 debates would be held, in a stark contrast to the 27 debates and forums that were held from 2011 to 2012. The announcement included which news organizations would host each debate, with Fox News and CNN having three each; and one each for ABC, CBS, NBC, CNBC, Fox Business Network, and a conservative media outlet to be announced.
The first debate occurred on Thursday, August 6, 2015 at a sports arena in Cleveland, Ohio. It was seen on the Fox News Channel by 24 million viewers, making the debate the most watched live broadcast in cable news history. Due to the number of candidates running for nomination, Fox News aired two separate debates on August 6, with the less popular candidates going first, followed by the candidates with more support in the 'prime time'debate.
One debate will follow per month until February 2016, when the GOP candidates will debate three times. Additionally, two debates have been confirmed for March, 2016.


== Logistics ==

With more than 15 major candidates vying for the nomination, the prospect of including all the candidates in a debate presented logistical difficulties. For the August 6, 2015 Fox News debate, only the top 10 candidates based on the most recent five national polls were invited to the 9 p.m. debate. Other candidates had the chance to participate in another debate that was held at 5 p.m. For the September 16, 2015 CNN debate, there will be one debate with only candidates who are in the top ten in recent polling, and another for those not in the top ten but polling at least one percent in "public polling". (However, CNN has reserved the right to, at their discretion, limit primetime participation to the top eight candidates, in a situation where fewer than 15 candidates qualify according to CNN's specific criteria.) In mid-July Fox News required that candidates offer a full personal financial disclosure prior to the first debate, which is in line with Federal Election Commission guidelines (but sets an earlier deadline for the disclosure).
The use of polls to winnow the field was criticized, especially but not exclusively by candidates with relatively low polling numbers in August – including Rick Santorum and Lindsey Graham – who complained that exclusion from the debates could prevent them from being competitive in the primaries and caucuses. Candidates ranked from 8th to 12th place in the polls prior to the August debate—including Chris Christie, Rick Perry, and John Kasich downplayed the importance of being invited to any specific debate, emphasizing that delegate-selection in early states is more important. Some in the media questioned Donald Trump's seriousness as a candidate and pondered as to whether or not he should be included in the debates. Trump filed FEC paperwork to make his run official; however, despite doing well in the early polling which effectively guaranteed him an invitation to the Fox News and CNN debates, Trump expressed ambivalence about the value of the debates to his own campaign (saying he was not a debater and therefore did not know how well he would perform in one), and to the process in general (saying that politicians are always debating with little in the way of results). Candidates such as Chris Christie and Rand Paul said that the debates would give candidates a chance to communicate policy-ideas to voters, and would thus be helpful in giving voters the information needed to decide which candidate to support. Outside the presidential campaigns themselves, the use of polling data was criticized by polling firms such as Marist, who temporarily suspended their national polling of preferences for the Republican nominee, on grounds that the use of polling-data to select the debate field puts polling firms under pressure to produce high-precision results that are inherently impossible to provide, due to the margin of error in any statistical sampling process like a preference poll (see statistical tie for tenth place and more generally the independence of clones). FiveThirtyEight pointed out the varying degrees of discretion that the television networks gave themselves with their distinct debate-invitation-criteria, noting that the polling-data can only be seen as an objective method for selection of the debate participants, if the full and exact criteria are made clear in advance. The rhetoric about the pros and cons of the debate criteria, and the use of polls to winnow the field, partially displaced more substantive discussions of concrete policies that candidates are proposing.


== Voter First Forum and RNC debates ==
The following table lists a pre-debate forum and a total of 12 RNC debates along with the dates, times, places, hosts, and participants.


=== Summaries ===


==== August 3, 2015 – Goffstown, New Hampshire ====
The 2016 Voters First Presidential Forum moderator was Jack Heath of WGIR radio, who asked questions of each of the participating candidates based on a random draw. Candidates each had three opportunities to speak: two rounds of questions, and a closing statement. Topics of discussion during the forum were partially selected based on the results of an online voter survey. The facilities were provided by the New Hampshire Institute of Politics and Political Library of St. Anselm College (politician-ratings-group Live Free or Die Alliance was an associate sponsor). The forum was organized in response to the top-ten invitation limitations placed by Fox News and CNN on their first televised debates (see descriptions below).
The only three Republican candidates who did not participate were Donald Trump (who chose not to attend), Jim Gilmore (who missed the cutoff deadline) and Mike Huckabee (who was invited, but did not respond). Senators Ted Cruz, Rand Paul, and Marco Rubio participated in the forum via satellite to avoid missing a vote.
The Voters First forum was broadcast nationally by C-SPAN as the originating source media entity, beginning at 6:30 p.m. EDT and lasting from 7 to 9 p.m. The event was also simulcast and/or co-sponsored by television stations KCRG-TV in Iowa, New England Cable News in the northeast, WBIN-TV in New Hampshire, WLTX-TV in South Carolina, radio stations New Hampshire Public Radio, WGIR in New Hampshire, iHeartRadio on the internet (C-SPAN is also offering an online version of the broadcast), and newspapers the Cedar Rapids Gazette in Iowa, the Union Leader in New Hampshire, and the Post and Courier in Charleston South Carolina. There was a live audience, with tickets to the event awarded via a lottery.


==== August 6, 2015 – Cleveland, Ohio ====
The first debate was hosted by Fox News, Facebook, and the Ohio Republican Party at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio – the same location as the future 2016 Republican National Convention. The two-hour debate invited the 10 highest-polling candidates, as measured by the average of the top five national polls selected by Fox. In addition, all other candidates who were "consistently being offered" as choices in national polls were invited to a one-hour debate earlier that same day. (Originally, the non-primetime debate had a minimum requirement that invitees were averaging at least 1% in Fox-recognized national polls, and was to be aired at noon for a total of two hours in duration.) The two-tiered debate hosted by Fox News on the 6th was qualitatively different from the C-SPAN forum held on the 3rd, for at least three reasons: it was a debate rather than a forum, where candidates were allowed to challenge each other, not just speak one at a time sequentially; it was divided into two tiers based on national polling numbers, only a subset of the candidates were on-stage (during each of the two distinct Fox News airtimes); and finally, Donald Trump and Mike Huckabee were participants in the primetime tier, but did not appear at the C-SPAN forum.
The candidates in the main debate were Donald Trump, Jeb Bush, Scott Walker, Mike Huckabee, Ben Carson, Ted Cruz, Marco Rubio, Rand Paul, Chris Christie, and John Kasich; the moderators were Bret Baier, Megyn Kelly, and Chris Wallace. Seven candidates who did not qualify were invited to participate in the 5 p.m. forum; these were Rick Perry, Bobby Jindal, Rick Santorum, Lindsey Graham, Carly Fiorina, Jim Gilmore, and George Pataki; the moderators for this debate were Bill Hemmer and Martha McCallum. Because of a rule-change announced by FOX one week before the debate-invitations went out, Graham, Pataki, and Gilmore were allowed to participate at 5 p.m. despite averaging below 1% in the five selected polls. (Former IRS Commissioner Mark Everson was excluded from the 5 p.m. tier, along with other relatively-unknown candidates who did not meet the updated invitation-criteria of "consistently being offered to respondents in major national polls as recognized by Fox News.") The five selected polls were conducted by Fox News, Bloomberg, CBS News, Monmouth University, and Quinnipiac University.
In the main event, Trump was afforded the most time to speak at the debate by the Fox moderators (at 10 minutes, 32 seconds) followed by Bush (8:31), Huckabee (6:40), Cruz (6:39), Kasich (6:31), Carson (6:23), Rubio (6:22), Christie (6:10), Walker (5:51), and Paul (5:10). The debate itself was viewed by 24 million people at its peak, setting records for the most-watched presidential primary debate ever and the highest-rated non-sports telecast in cable television history.
The two different debates received rather different analyses in terms of the performances of the candidates. In the lower tier debate with only 7 candidates, Carly Fiorina was overwhelmingly considered the best debater, while Perry and Jindal were also praised, and Gilmore, Graham, Pataki, and Santorum were criticized. In the primetime debate, Donald Trump’s overall performance was greatly criticized as rude, erratic, and ultimately not meeting expectations, while Cruz, Rubio, Christie, and Huckabee received praise. Notable conflicts between candidates included Rand Paul vs. Christie over the NSA surveillance program, Paul vs. Trump on the latter's possible third-party run, and Christie vs. Huckabee on the issue of welfare reform. Trump also clashed with two of the moderators – Kelly and Wallace – on the issue of sexism with Kelly, and the issue of illegal immigration with Wallace (specifically, Trump's claims that the Mexican government was deliberately sending criminals into America illegally).


==== September 16, 2015 – Simi Valley, California ====
The second debate will take place at (and be co-sponsored by) the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library, which previously hosted two of the Republican debates in 2008 – the first and penultimate ones. This 2016 debate will air on CNN, and will be simulcast on the Salem Radio Network. Similar to the Fox News-sponsored debate in Cleveland, but with slightly different ranking-criteria, the debate will be split into primetime and pre-primetime groups based on averaged polling numbers. The primetime group will consist of no more than 10 candidates. On August 11, former First Lady Nancy Reagan invited qualifying candidates, whose polling is above 1% in at least three recognized polls, to her husband's library for the September debate. As of August 2015, 16 of the candidates that participated in the August 6 debate on Fox have also been invited to participate in this September 16 debate on CNN; former Governor Jim Gilmore has not yet qualified for an invitation. The primetime debate will consist of the candidates ranking in the top ten, as measured by nationwide polling performed by specific firms in specific ways, averaged across polls that are released between July 16 and September 10. Specific airtimes for the primetime and the undercard broadcasts have not yet been announced, but unlike the multi-hour gap between the two-tiered August 6 debates (and also distinct from the single-tiered forum with fourteen candidates on August 3), the two-tiered CNN broadcasts will be consecutive, with the primetime top-ten debate planned to immediately follow the second-tier-six undercard broadcast.
The moderator is Jake Tapper of CNN, with side-by-side participation (including questions) by Hugh Hewitt of Salem Radio. Unlike the August 6th debate (but similar to the August 3rd forum), the same moderator-team will address questions to all candidates. In May 2015, Tapper was listed as a speaker at a Clinton Foundation event; CNN said this was a misunderstanding, and that Tapper was not a speaker, although Tapper was going to be at the Clinton Foundation event for a televised interview with Bill Clinton, and would also moderate a panel about business. An editorial in USA Today said Tapper had a history of being liberal despite his reputation for fairness, but pieces in Breitbart and Hot Air said that Tapper was an honest broker who asks tough questions of all politicians. Before joining CNN, Tapper worked at ABC as whitehouse correspondent for a decade; Tapper wrote a book on the 2000 Florida election recount ("omnidirectional denunciation") after covering the general election and the 2000 Republican primaries for Salon.com, plus in the 1990s was briefly a staffer for Marjorie Margolies-Mezvinsky (D-PA). As of 2015, Tapper's current reputation among Republicans for fairness is considered very good (for a broadcaster not employed by Fox).
Hewitt is a conservative talk radio host, and a professor of Constitutional law. His talk radio show has over one million weekly listeners, five or ten times fewer than more well-known names in conservative talk radio (e.g. Rush Limbaugh, Glenn Beck, Sean Hannity, Mark Levin, and Laura Ingraham whom the RNC also considered), but Hewitt has interviewed almost all the 2016 presidential candidates; his show has been called "thoughtful" and "wonk talk radio." Hewitt prefers questions about multi-year DoD budget line-items like the Ohio-class submarine, the roots of the Islamic State, and books such as The Looming Tower about the roots of Al-Qaeda as well as Our Kids about education. Before his work at Salem Radio, Hewitt was a PBS broadcaster in the 1990s; his first political work was as a staffer under Nixon (he later helped oversee the Nixon Library), after graduating from law school, Hewitt spent six years during the 1980s in the Reagan administration. Hewitt works for the same parent-corporation that owns RedState (which invited some but not all candidates to their conference in early August), and Hewitt has been specifically critical of Trump's campaign. Hewitt was also critical of the lines of questioning pursued by Fox moderators (towards Trump specifically as well as the other candidates), and said that he wants the questions at the September 16th debate to cover a different set of issues that will be of more specific interest to Republican primary voters. Hewitt's overall reputation is that he is a conservative, although he sometimes disagrees with his talk radio peers; unlike Tapper, his name is not currently well known to liberals nor independents.


==== October 28, 2015 – Boulder, Colorado ====
The third debate will be held on October 28 at the University of Colorado in Boulder, which is also one of the sponsors. CNBC has stated that the debate will focus on the economy.


==== November 2015 – Madison, Wisconsin ====
The fourth debate will be held somewhere in Wisconsin, airing on the Fox Business Network and sponsored by The Wall Street Journal.


==== December 15, 2015 – Reno, Nevada ====
The fifth debate, and the final debate of 2015, will be held on December 15, 2015, somewhere in Nevada. It will be the second debate to air on CNN, and will also be broadcast by Salem Radio.


==== January 2016 – Des Moines, Iowa ====
The sixth debate, and the first debate of 2016, will be held in Iowa, which holds the first caucuses, and will be the second debate to air on Fox News.


==== February 6, 2016 – New Hampshire ====
The seventh debate will be held in the first state to hold primaries, New Hampshire, and will air on ABC News and be sponsored by Independent Journal Review.


==== February 13, 2016 – South Carolina ====
The eighth debate, and second consecutive debate in the month of February, will be held in another early primary state of South Carolina, airing on CBS News.


==== February 26, 2016 – Houston, Texas ====
The ninth debate, and third and final debate of February, will be held in Houston, Texas, and will air on NBC News in conjunction with Telemundo and National Review.


==== March 2016 – TBA ====
The first of two known debates to be held in March 2016, and the tenth debate overall, will be the third and final debate to air on Fox News.


==== March 10, 2016 – TBA ====
The second of two known debates in March, the eleventh overall, will be the third and final debate to air on CNN, and the second debate to be broadcast by both CNN and Salem Radio.


== See also ==
Republican Party presidential primaries
Republican Party presidential primaries, 2016
Republican Party presidential candidates, 2016
Democratic Party presidential debates, 2016


== References ==


== External links ==
2016 Republican Primary Debate Schedule
2016 Democratic Primary Debate Schedule
Video of August 3, 2015 debate in Goffstown, New Hampshire
Video of August 6, 2015 debate in Cleveland, Ohio