Radhe Maa
Radhe Maa (born 4 April 1965) is an Indian self proclaimed, and disillusioned fake spiritual guru based in Borivali suburb of Mumbai, Maharashtra. In August 2015, videos of Radhe Ma in a mini skirt, while her devotees carrying her around during satsangs went viral online. Activist-lawyer Falguni Brahmbhatt lodged a police complaint against her for obscenity, running a business disguised as religion, fraud and cheating. Subsequently, She was banned from the Nashik Kumbh mela by Swaroopanand Saraswati of Dvaraka Pitha and Mahant Gyandas, the president of Akhil Bharatiya Akhara Parishad. Sanjeev Gupta dismissed these videos as doctored, and denied allegations of obscene acts at her satsangs. Politician and reality TV entertainer Rahul Mahajan also posted pictures of her dressed in a short dress, which is considered inappropriate for her position. This led to further controversy. Again, Gupta dismissed these as morphed.
In July 2015, Nikki Gupta of the Gupta family named Radhe Maa, her husband Nakul Gupta and five others in a dowry-related complaint. Nikki accused Radhe Maa of inciting her in-laws to demand more dowry, and of forcing her to work at the ashram, where she was physically assaulted. The Guptas dismissed the allegations as a result of a matrimonial dispute. On 6 August 2015, the Mumbai Police declared her to have absconded in this alleged case of dowry harassment, and issued a lookout notice against her.


== Early life ==
Radhe Maa's real name is Sukhvinder Kaur. She was born on 4 April 1965 in Dorangala village of Gurdaspur district in Punjab. Her followers state that she was drawn to spirituality as a child, and spent a lot of time at the Kali temple in her village. However, according to people of her village, she did not show any spiritual leanings as a child.
Kaur studied till Class X. She married Mohan Singh at age 17. She used to stitch clothes to supplement her husband's small income. After her husband left for Doha (Qatar) in search of a better job, she was attracted towards spirituality. At the age of 23, she became a disciple of Mahant Ram Deen Das of 1008 Paramhans Bagh Dera Mukerian in Hoshiarpur district. Ram Deen Das oversaw her deeksha (initiation ceremony), and gave her the title Radhe Maa ("Mother Radha").


== As a spiritual guru ==
After joining the Paramhans Dera, Radhe Maa began holding satsangs. Later, she moved to Mumbai, where Manmohan Gupta — the chairman of MM Mithaiwala (a popular chain of sweet shops) — became her disciple. She moved into the Gupta family's house. There is little information about when and how she moved to Mumbai, but in 2015, Sanjeev Gupta of the Gupta family stated that she had lived in their house for the past 12 years.
During her early years in Mumbai, Radhe Maa used to frequently travel back to Hoshiarpur and Kapurthala in Punjab for satsangs. However, as she started gaining more followers in Mumbai, these visits became infrequent. Around 2003-04, a Hindu organization in Phagwara objected to her portrayal as an incarnation of goddess Durga. Subsequently, she was forced to tender an apology.
Sanjeev Gupta of the Gupta famly became a Managing Trustee of "Mamtamai Shri Radhe Guru Maa Charitable Trust". The owner of Global Advertiser, a company that controls prime-location hoardings in the city, Gupta promoted Radhe Maa's divyadarshans ("divine darshan or sight") through billboards across the city.


== References ==