Southpaw (film)
Southpaw is a 2015 sports drama film directed by Antoine Fuqua and written by Kurt Sutter. The film stars Jake Gyllenhaal, Forest Whitaker, and Rachel McAdams. The film was released on July 24, 2015, by The Weinstein Company.
This was the last film to be scored by James Horner before the composer's death. The movie's soundtrack album was dedicated to his memory. The album was a big commercial success, reaching the top 20 charts in nations such as Australia and Canada.


== Plot ==
Billy Hope (Jake Gyllenhaal) is a boxer who lives in New York City with his wife Maureen (Rachel McAdams) and their daughter Leila (Oona Laurence). During a match in which he defends his World Light Heavyweight title, Billy sustains an eye injury and is convinced by Maureen to retire while he's at the top. At a charity event for an organization near and dear to him, Billy is taunted by an up-and-coming boxer, Miguel "Magic" Escobar, leading to a brawl in which Maureen is accidentally shot and killed by Miguel's brother Hector, who flees.
Billy begins abusing alcohol and drugs while obsessively searching for Hector. He eventually gets a tip of his whereabouts, but finds only his drug-addict wife Maria (Rita Ora), and leaves after learning Hector is a father. After attacking a referee out of frustration after losing a fight, Billy is suspended and left indebted, leading to his house and belongings being repossessed. He continues to spiral out of control and nearly dies after crashing his car while driving intoxicated, which also causes him to lose custody of Leila, who is put under care of Child Protective Services officer Angela Rivera (Naomie Harris). The incident drives Billy to become sober, but Leila cuts ties with him, blaming him for their predicament.
At the behest of friends, Billy gets a job at a gym owned by seasoned boxer, Titus "Tick" Wills (Forest Whitaker), and eventually convinces Tick to become his trainer. Billy's former manager Jordan Mains, and current manager of Miguel, (50 Cent) arranges a fight between Billy and Miguel, that could put Billy back in the spotlight. Tick is reluctant to train Billy, fearful he might be blinded by his vendetta against Miguel, but is motivated to do so when another of his students is killed by his abusive father while attempting to defend his mother.
Leila is reluctant to forgive her father, but she is allowed to watch the fight with Angela. As the match begins, Miguel has the upper hand against Billy, but, with Tick's advice, Billy turns the tables, prompting Miguel to use Maureen to psychologically undermine Billy and goad him into a suspension. However, Billy is able to remain calm and keep Miguel at bay until the fight is over. Billy is declared the winner by a split-decision and reunites with Leila in the locker room, where she forgives his past mistakes and they embrace.


== Cast ==
Jake Gyllenhaal as Billy Hope
Forest Whitaker as Titus "Tick" Wills
Rachel McAdams as Maureen Hope
Naomie Harris as Angela Rivera
Victor Ortiz as Ramone
Curtis "50 Cent" Jackson as Jordan Mains
Miguel Gomez as Miguel "Magic" Escobar
Oona Laurence as Leila Hope
Beau Knapp as Jon Jon
Rita Ora as Maria Escobar
Clare Foley as Alice
Skylan Brooks as Hoppy


== Production ==
On December 13, 2010, DreamWorks acquired the script, with Eminem eyed to play the lead role. The film's screenwriter Kurt Sutter said the project was inspired by the rapper's personal struggles. He stated that he had taken meetings with Eminem's producing partners over the past seven years, looking for something to do together. "I know he's very selective and doesn't do a lot. But he shared so much of his personal struggle in this raw and very honest album, one that I connected with on a lot of levels. He is very interested in the boxing genre, and it seemed like an apt metaphor, because his own life has been a brawl. In a way, this is a continuation of the 8 Mile story, but we are doing a metaphorical narrative of the second chapter of his life. He'll play a world champion boxer who really hits a hard bottom, and has to fight to win back his life for his young daughter. At its core, this is a retelling of his struggles over the last five years of his life, using the boxing analogy. I love that the title refers to Marshall being a lefty, which is to boxing what a white rapper is to hip hop; dangerous, unwanted, and completely unorthodox. It's a much harder road for a southpaw than a right handed boxer."
On June 6, 2011, it was announced Antoine Fuqua was in talks to direct the film. On August 11, 2011, DreamWorks dropped the film. On October 20, 2011, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer picked up the film, and Columbia Pictures was set to distribute. In May 2012, Eminem put the film on hold to focus on music. On March 6, 2014, Antoine Fuqua signed on to direct, with Jake Gyllenhaal replacing Eminem in the lead role and The Weinstein Company distributing the film. On May 14, 2014, Forest Whitaker, Lupita Nyong'o, and Rachel McAdams joined the cast. On June 6, 2014, Miguel Gomez joined the cast of the film. On June 17, 2014, Victor Ortiz joined the cast. On August 7, 2014, Beau Knapp joined the cast to play Jon Jon, Billy Hope's lifelong best friend. On August 8, 2014, Naomie Harris joined the cast of the film, to replace Lupita Nyong'o in the role of Angela Rivera. On November 7, 2014, Harvey Weinstein confirmed British singer Rita Ora as part of the cast.
Southpaw marks the first investment in an American film by WanDa Pictures, a division of Wang Jianlin's Chinese conglomerate Dalian Wanda Group. Principal photography began on June 16, 2014. Filming took place in Pittsburgh and Indiana, Pennsylvania, and sets in New York.


== Release ==
The film had its world premiere at the 2015 Shanghai International Film Festival on June 15, 2015, where it was in competition, and was released on July 24, 2015, by The Weinstein Company.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
As of August 9, 2015, Southpaw has grossed $40.7 million in North America and $10.1 million in other territories for a total gross of $50.8 million, against a budget of $25 million.
In its opening weekend, the film grossed $16.7 million from 2,772 theaters, finishing 5th at the box office.


=== Critical response ===
Southpaw has received mixed reviews from critics. The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a rating of 58%, based on 170 reviews, with a rating average of 6/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Jake Gyllenhaal delivers an impressively committed performance, but Southpaw beats it down with a dispiriting drama that pummels viewers with genre clichés." On Metacritic, the film has a score of 57 out of 100, based on 42 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". On CinemaScore, audiences gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale.
Soren Anderson of The Seattle Times gave the film two and a half stars out of four, saying "Southpaw, a boxing movie with a theme of redemption, is redeemed by the performances of its two main actors, Jake Gyllenhaal and Forest Whitaker." Kyle Smith of the New York Post gave the film one and a half stars out of four, saying "It brings back every stale genre convention you can think of, then hopes you won't recognize predictability pumped up with swearing and steroids and an Eminem song during the training montage." Ty Burr of The Boston Globe gave the film two and a half stars out of four, saying "This is a genre with especially sturdy bones, and when Southpaw connects, which is more often than you might expect, you feel it down to your toes." Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post gave the film one and a half stars out of four, saying "Southpaw may be rote, predictable and mawkish, but none of those faults lie in its star. Even when he looks like an unholy mess, he transcends the movie he's in." Steven Rea of The Philadelphia Inquirer gave the film three out of four stars, saying "What keeps this cornball business from getting out of hand is the commitment of Gyllenhaal, whose performance is fierce and muscular, in and out of the ring." Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune gave the film two and a half stars out of four, saying "The script may have hamburger for brains, but Fuqua slams it home with the help of actors who give their all - even when giving a little less might have made things more interesting."
Peter Howell of the Toronto Star gave the film two and a half stars out of four, saying "This isn't great cinema, but it's satisfying movie-making, with nothing more on its mind than telling a heart-tugging story." A. O. Scott of The New York Times said, "I wish I could say Southpaw was a knockout, or even a contender, that it went the distance or scored on points. But it's strictly an undercard bout, displaying enough heart and skill to keep the paying customers from getting too restless." Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a C+, saying "Just as director Antoine Fuqua starts to close in on something interesting and unexpected, he retreats to the safety of his corner and gives us what we've seen too many times before: a predictable flurry of melodramatic jabs." Barbara VanDenburgh of The Arizona Republic gave the film three out of five stars, saying "Southpaw is all about the fist. There's no delicate footwork here, no lingering grace notes. It's a film played entirely in power chords." James Berardinelli of ReelViews gave the film three out of four stars, saying "Southpaw isn't content with presenting a gallery of clichéd characters. It takes the time to put flesh on the bones." Colin Covert of the Star Tribune gave the film one out of four stars, saying "As a troubled slugger, Gyllenhaal is impressively muscle-bound, but gives no knockout performance. His work drags on like 12 rounds of fistfight fatigue."


== Soundtrack ==

Eminem executive produced the soundtrack, which was released by Shady Records on July 24, 2015. He released his first single from the soundtrack called "Phenomenal" on June 2, 2015.
An album of James Horner's score was released through Sony Classical on July 24, 2015. This was Horner's final score (it was recorded after The 33, although Southpaw was released first); he was killed in a plane crash on June 22, 2015.


== References ==


== External links ==
Southpaw at the Internet Movie Database
Southpaw at Box Office Mojo
Southpaw at Rotten Tomatoes
Southpaw at Metacritic