Srimanthudu
Srimanthudu (English: Wealthy Man) is a 2015 Telugu drama film written and directed by Koratala Siva, under Mythri Movie Makers. Besides co-producing the film, Mahesh Babu played the film's protagonist with Shruti Haasan playing the female lead. Jagapati Babu, Rajendra Prasad, Sampath Raj, Sukanya and Harish Uthaman appear in supporting roles.
Srimanthudu was made on a budget of ₹400—700 million. In addition to directing the film, Siva wrote its screenplay. Devi Sri Prasad composed the score and R. Madhi was its cinematographer. Production began on 11 August 2014 at Ramanaidu Studios in Hyderabad. Principal photography began on 7 November 2014 in Pune, lasting until mid-June 2015. Most of the film was shot in and around Hyderabad, while few portions were filmed across Tamil Nadu and Malaysia. Srimanthudu and its Tamil dubbed version titled Selvandhan had a simultaneous worldwide release on 7 August 2015 in around 2500 screens and opened to positive critical reception.


== Cast ==


== Production ==


=== Development ===
UTV Motion Pictures announced that they are going to produce a film starring Mahesh Babu directed by Koratala Siva which marks their maiden Telugu production while Mahesh's sister Manjula Ghattamaneni would present the film on Indira Productions banner. A possible delay was expected as Mahesh accepted to work in a film directed by Raj & DK produced by Ashwini Dutt after completing the shooting of Aagadu (2014). In late March 2014, UTV Motion Pictures South business studios chief G. Dhananjayan announced that the film would commence in July 2014 while the artistes and technicians would be announced in a week's time when there were reports that the film was shelved.
After UTV Motion Pictures backed out of the project because of differences with Koratala Siva, overseas distribution company My3 Movie Makers came forward to produce this film. Devi Sri Prasad was confirmed as the music director then while R. Madhi was selected as the cinematographer who charged ₹14 million (US$210,000) for this project. In late May 2014, Koratala Siva dismissed the reports that the film is titled Parakrama. The film's opening ceremony was held on August 11, 2014 at Ramanaidu Studios in Hyderabad and Mahesh Babu's wife Namrata Shirodkar along with few eminent Telugu celebrities attended the launch event. Mahesh Babu participated in the story discussions with Koratala Siva and shared his inputs for the betterment of the script.
After considering the titles Magaadu, Maa Akka Bangaram, and Zamindar, Srimanthudu was confirmed as the film's title on 29 May 2015, after registering it in mid December 2014. On the same day, Mahesh was confirmed to co-produce the film under his new banner G. Mahesh Babu Entertainment Pvt. Ltd. whose logo features a silhouette image of Mahesh's son Gautham Krishna. The film also marked Mahesh's first film production venture. Shirodkar later revealed that Mahesh opted to co-produce the film to control the film's budget and would accept share in profits in lieu of his remuneration.


=== Casting ===
Shruti Haasan was selected as the female lead, which was supposed to be her first onscreen appearance with Mahesh though she appeared in an item number in Aagadu after signing this film. She was reported to charge a remuneration of ₹12.5 million which was the highest remuneration she received in her career till then. She was said to be seen in a full glamorous role. Jagapati Babu was selected to play the role of Mahesh's father in the film after Koratala Siva was impressed with his work in the 2014 film Legend. On the day of launch, Rajendra Prasad, Sampath Raj and Brahmanandam were announced to play pivotal roles in this film. Out of the above, Sampath Raj was confirmed as the antagonist.
Mahesh Babu was reported to play a dual role in the film for the first time in his career which was dismissed by Koratala Siva as a rumor. Tulasi was selected to play Shruti Haasan's mother. Prabhas accepted to give voice-over for few scenes in the film. Shruti Haasan was reported to walk out from the project in late November 2014. Those reports however were rubbished as rumors later. After considering actresses proficient in classical dance for performing a peppy dance number set in a rural backdrop, Poorna was selected as she was a trained Kathak dancer. After considering Nadhiya and Gracy Singh for the role of Mahesh's mother, Sukanya was finalized in late January 2015. Mahesh was reported to be seen as a NRI in the film in early February 2015.
The film's unit added that Mahesh would be seen as the son of a millionaire in the film. For his appearance, he chose to sport a casual look replete with cardigans, jackets and scarfs. He sported layered hair, messy hair-do and a straight cut hairstyles for varying episodes in the film. Siva confirmed through his Twitter page that Rahul Ravindran would make a small yet important cameo appearance. After auditioning seventy actresses, Angana Roy was selected to play an "important part" in the film marking her debut in Telugu cinema. Roy called her character a "glamorous one" and denied to reveal further details while confirming her inclusion. Sanam Shetty was signed in on after one of the unit members of her unreleased Telugu debut Intinta Annamayya convinced the makers. Tejaswi Madivada, who earlier worked with Mahesh in Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu (2013), was signed in on to play the role of a politician's daughter.


=== Filming ===
Principal photography was expected to start on 11 September 2014 which would be wrapped up in continuous schedules. After the launch, it was confirmed that the regular shooting would start in early September after Mahesh completes his work in Aagadu and will be completed in one long schedule. The first schedule was planned in Hyderabad and the second schedule was planned in Bangkok. The principal photography was said to begin on 9 October 2014. It was postponed to 24 October 2014 while Mahesh was said to join the film's sets on 3 November 2014. The first schedule was planned in Pune from 8 November 2014 and parts of the film were said to be shot in some foreign locations.
The Pune schedule began on a day in advance and was planned to be wrapped up in 10 days. Shruti Haasan joined the film's sets on 8 November 2014. The lead pair was mobbed by the local people during the film's shoot at an IT hub in Pune. Mahesh completed filming for his part in the first schedule on 14 November 2014 and the team completed the schedule two days later. The next schedule began at Hyderabad in a private studio where a song on Mahesh and Shruti Haasan was planned to be shot. However the introduction song of Mahesh in the film was shot on him along with a group of dancers at Ramoji Film City nearly from 11 December 2014.
Later few key scenes on Mahesh, Shruti Haasan, Rajendra Prasad and Ali were shot in Manduva Logili of Ramoji Film City. Koratala Siva asked Mahesh to go shirtless for a fight sequence in the film which the latter declined. The next schedule was planned from 28 December 2014. The makers planned a long schedule in South Africa after completing a schedule in Karaikudi and Tenkasi in Tamil Nadu. Meanwhile, the third schedule was announced to be shot in Hyderabad. After filming few key scenes, the shoot of the introduction song continued at Ramoji Film City from 4 January 2015 under the supervision of Raju Sundaram and the set erected for the purpose resembled the one erected for a similar song in Murari (2001). A traditional song featuring Poorna and Mahesh was shot in a temple set at Ramoji Film City. By the end of January 2015, the film's shooting was expected to be wrapped up in a month.
A song on Mahesh and Shruti Haasan was shot in a set erected at Annapurna 7 Acres Studios. After its completion, the film's team planned a one month long schedule starting from 6 February 2015 at Pollachi to complete major portions of the film. But that schedule began at Madurai where Shruti Haasan and Vennela Kishore rejoined the film's sets. The film's shoot then moved to Karaikudi. An action sequence on Mahesh and others was shot at Pollachi in late February 2015. Later, a song choreographed by Bosco-Caesar was shot on Mahesh and Shruti Haasan. This also marked the first Telugu film of Bosco-Caesar. The filming was expected to continue at Palani till 3 March 2015. Filming shifted to Hyderabad where few scenes focusing Mahesh, Roy and others were shot. In April 2015, the film's next schedule began at Malaysia on whose completion, Mahesh took a break and joined the film's sets at Hyderabad on 6 May 2015.
On 5 June 2015, Madhi said in an interview that twelve days of shoot is pending. He added that two types of cameras — Alexa XT and Red Dragon, with which the audience shall find a lot of mild movement shots throughout the film. On 17 June 2015, Koratala Siva told the media that only one week of patch work is left to be completed. By then, a dance sequence of a song on the lead pair was being shot at Ramoji Film City.


== Soundtrack ==
Devi Sri Prasad composed the film's soundtrack which consists of six songs; the lyrics were written by Ramajogayya Sastry except for "Charuseela" which was co-written by Prasad. Aditya Music marketed the film's soundtrack. Haasan later revealed that "Charuseela" is based on her character in the film and the tune is inspired from one of the compositions of Michael Jackson. The soundtrack of the original and dubbed Tamil versions were released on 18 July 2015 and 4 August 2015 respectively.
The soundtrack received positive reviews. The Times of India gave the soundtrack 3.5 out of 5 stars. IndiaGlitz gave the soundtrack 3.25 out of 5 stars and stated, "The album caters to the fan base of both DSP and Mahesh Babu. DSP delivers the output in such a way as to give 'Mirchi' feeling, adding an impressive array of tunes." Behindwoods gave the soundtrack 3 out of 5 stars and called it a signature album with Prasad's trademark reflected all over it.
All lyrics written by Ramajogayya Sastry, except where noted. 


== Release ==
In December 2014, the producers announced a release was planned for May 2015. Due to technical issues, the film's release was postponed to 17 July 2015 The global television broadcast rights were sold to Zee Telugu in late May 2015 for an undisclosed high price, which was estimated to be around ₹100 million. By holding a press meet on 18 June 2015, the makers announced that the film's release has been postponed to 7 August 2015. The reason behind the postponement of the film's release was the acceptance of its makers to do so upon a personal request by Shobu Yarlagadda, the producer of Baahubali: The Beginning which was scheduled for a worldwide release on 10 July 2015. Srimanthudu was dubbed into Tamil as Selvandhan which will be releasing simultaneously along with the original on 7 August 2015. Srimanthudu was released in 2500 screens worldwide.


=== Distribution ===
Classic Entertainments acquired the overseas distribution rights of the film in late February 2015, for an amount of ₹81 million, which was the highest price that any Telugu film commanded in the overseas market till date. By the second week of June 2015, distribution rights of most of the regions were sold out while negotiations for a few were ongoing. Global Cinemas, Aditya films and Vintage creations acquired the distribution rights of Nizam, West and East Godavari regions for ₹145 million, ₹32.5 million and ₹34.3 million respectively. On the other hand, 14 Reels Entertainment and Devi films were in talks with the makers for the rights of Krishna and Ceded regions respectively while 'S' Creations was expected to acquire the Guntur region rights for an amount of ₹40—42.5 million. However, a press release on 19 June 2015 stated that Abhishek Pictures acquired the theatrical distribution rights of Nizam region. The film's global theatrical rights were sold for a total of ₹596 million. The theatrical rights of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and the rest of India were sold for ₹210 million, ₹60 million and ₹20 million respectively. Eros International acquired the film's worldwide distribution rights on 5 August 2015.


=== Marketing ===
The film's first look was scheduled to release on 31 May 2015 on the eve of Mahesh's father Krishna‍‍ '​‍s birthday and the hashtag #Mahesh21 began trending on twitter for the same. The first look poster was unveiled by the makers on 29 May 2015. The poster featured Mahesh riding a Cannondale Scalpel 29 Carbon 3 bike costing approximately ₹0.35 million. The first look teaser of 60 seconds was released on 31 May 2015. The second poster featuring Mahesh was released on 14 July 2015. Another poster featuring Mahesh was released on 24 July 2015. Close-Up entered into a co-branding partnership with this film in late July 2015. 


== Reception ==


=== Critical reception ===
Srimanthudu received positive reviews from critics. Sangeetha Devi Dundoo of The Hindu called Srimanthudu a "star-driven film with a strong plot that's worth a watch". Dundoo further stated "This isn't Ashutosh Gowariker‍‍ '​‍s Swades, where Shah Rukh Khan finds his true calling in a much more realistic manner. The social consciousness comes coated with commercially viable ingredients and still, makes for an engaging watch". Sify called Srimanthudu a "right mix of Mahesh's emotional and class performance, Shruthi's charisma, fine storyline and all materials that are needed for a good entertainer". The reviewer appreciated Siva for not writing a separate comedy track to deviate the story. Karthik Pasupulate of The Times of India rated the film 3.5 out of 5 and wrote "You could say this movie is Mahesh Babu's Swades (the 2004 SRK film) albeit a little dumbed down. Or a Mirchi (the Prabhas film) rehashed. Yet there can be no denying that Srimanthudu achieves more than any big ticket Tollywood potboiler has in more in that last decade, for the simple reason that it is a drama made like one." Sethumadhavan N of Bangalore Mirror rated the film 3.5 out of 5 and wrote "Make no mistake, Srimanthudu is certainly a big commercial entertainer and has most of the elements needed for the same. But to deliver a total commercial which doesn't have a great plot and yet remaining engaging all the way isn't easy at all. That is where the writing by Siva emerges triumphant." Suresh Kavirayani of Deccan Chronicle rated the film 3.5 out of 5 and wrote "Though there are a few hiccups, Srimanthudu is a good emotional drama with excellent performance by Mahesh Babu, supported by good content with neat dialogues". Pravallika Anjuri of Oneindia Entertainment rated the film 3.5 out of 5 and stated "Srimanthudu would probably get more and more richer in the coming days after winning your hearts with some lively performances and timely punches. Go for it! Mahesh Babu's Srimanthudu has a sound story to tell you." IndiaGlitz rated the film 3.5 out of 5 and called Srimanthudu a "family entertainer with mass appeal, thanks to Mahesh's understated acting" and added "Koratala Shiva doesn't really unleash a Mirchi-fied Mahesh Babu even in the second half. All throughout, the billionaire Srimanthudu maintains his composure even when he has to turn into a 'hanthakudu'. Things are so understated that the fight-to-finish itself looks half-done."
Karthik Keramalu of CNN-IBN rated the film 3 out of 5 stars and stated "All in all, Srimanthudu is a notch above the so-so model of commercial films. It’d have been neater had the gap between the intent and the content of the film narrowed down further". Behindwoods rated the film 2.5 out of 5 and stated "Overall, Srimanthudu is a usual family entertainer presented in a style of its own. It is highly entertaining at points and keeps the attention of the audience in tact with the show master, Mahesh Babu’s magic." Kirubhakar Purushothaman of India Today rated the film 2.5 out of 5 and wrote "There are many cliches throughout the story, but still Srimanthudu manages to hold your attention. Though Srimanthudu has failed to serve anything new, he is rich and complete. When the film ends, everyone in the film is happy. As are Mahesh Babu's fans." Suhas Yellapuntala of The New Indian Express wrote "The director showcases power, greed, corruption as well as regression, hope and agony, in equal measure. However, while Mahesh Babu effortlessly sails through the movie, Srimanthudu is cliched, unimaginative and stretched beyond its potential". He added "Srimanthudu would have made for much better viewing if it had been cut shorter by about half an hour. At the end of it, watching the film becomes an endurance rather than an experience".


=== Box office ===
Registering an occupancy of 90% across the globe on its first day, Srimanthudu collected approximately a distributor share of ₹130 million at the AP/Nizam box office and ₹120 million from Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, the rest of India and overseas markets taking its first day global total share to ₹250 million. With this, it managed to break the records set by Attarintiki Daredi (2013) and S/O Satyamurthy (2015) and became the second highest Telugu film opener of the year. Trade analyst Trinath told IANS that the first day global gross stood at ₹310 million. The film grossed ₹200 million on its second day at the global box office, taking its two day global total gross to ₹500 million. With this, it became the second faster Telugu film of the year after Baahubali: The Beginning to do so. The film managed to collect a total nett of ₹330 million and a distributor share of ₹200 million in two days at the global box office. The film grossed ₹250 million on its third day taking its three day global total gross to ₹750 million thus breaking the records set by Telugu films other than Baahubali: The Beginning.


==== International ====
Srimanthudu collected approximately US$0.5 million from 117 locations on Thursday premiere shows held in the United States. the film collected US$1,753,698 (₹111.8 million) from about 150 screens at the United States box office in two days which Taran Adarsh called an "impressive" start. By the end of its first weekend, Srimanthudu collected a total of US$2.1 million at the United States box office and became the second highest grossing Telugu film of all time in the country. It also became the second Telugu film to cross the US$2 million mark after Baahubali: The Beginning.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Srimanthudu at the Internet Movie Database