Straight Outta Compton (2015 film)
Straight Outta Compton is a 2015 American biographical drama film directed by F. Gary Gray. The film revolves around the rise and fall of the Compton, California hip hop group N.W.A, borrows its title from the name of N.W.A's 1988 debut studio album. The film was released on August 14, 2015.


== Synopsis ==
The film chronicles the background history of the group N.W.A, its members and the dynamics of their relationships with each other, from the band's inception, to growing success and stardom until the eventual disbanding.


== Cast ==


== Production ==


=== Development ===
In March 2009, it was announced that the film was in development at New Line Cinema, with writers S. Leigh Savidge and Alan Wenkus and Tomica Woods-Wright, Ice Cube, and Dr. Dre set to produce the film. In May 2010, it was announced Andrea Berloff would write a draft of the screenplay. In September 2011, John Singleton told The Playlist that he was in talks to direct the film, saying: "I can’t talk about it too prematurely about the stuff I'm doing because nothing’s come to fruition yet, but Cube and I are talking about doing the N.W.A. story. The script is really, really good, and so we're just figuring it out. New Line really wants to make it." Also in September 2011, F. Gary Gray, Craig Brewer, and Peter Berg were reportedly in talks to direct the film. In April 2012, F. Gary Gray was selected as director. Gray has worked with Ice Cube in the film Friday and Dr. Dre in the film Set It Off. By 2013, the film had been picked up by Universal Studios, who, in December 2013, hired Jonathan Herman to write a new draft of the script and brought in Will Packer to executive produce.


=== Casting ===
Casting calls began in the summer of 2010. There had been rumors of Lil Eazy E playing his late father Eazy-E, and Ice Cube's son and fellow rapper O'Shea Jackson Jr. playing his father as well. Ice Cube said of the movie, "We're taking it to the nooks and crannies, I think deeper than any other article or documentary on the group," he said. "These are the intimate conversations that helped forge N.W.A. To me, I think it's interesting to anybody who loves that era and I don't know any other movie where you can mix Gangster Rap, the F.B.I., L.A. Riots, HIV, and fucking feuding with each other. This movie has everything from Darryl Gates and the battering ram."
On February 21, 2014, director Gray announced a March 9, 2014 open casting call for the film in Gardena, California via his Twitter account. There were also open casting calls in Atlanta and Chicago. Rapper YG auditioned to play MC Ren in the film. The project was scheduled to start filming in April 2014 but was pushed backed due to casting delays.
On June 18, 2014, Universal officially announced that the N.W.A biopic Straight Outta Compton would be released theatrically on August 14, 2015. It was also confirmed that Ice Cube's son, O'Shea Jackson Jr., will play a younger version of his father in the film. O'Shea Jr. will join Jason Mitchell and Corey Hawkins who will portray group members Eazy-E and Dr. Dre, respectively, in the film. In early July 2014, casting directors for the N.W.A biopic issued a casting call for extras and vintage cars in the Los Angeles area for scenes in the movie. The casting call release stated that filming would begin in August 2014. In July 2014, it was confirmed Aldis Hodge would portray MC Ren and Neil Brown, Jr. would play DJ Yella. On August 15, 2014, Paul Giamatti joined the cast to play N.W.A's manager Jerry Heller. On August 26, 2014, Keith Stanfield joined the cast to play Snoop Dogg.
On June 16, 2015, Ice Cube revealed that a "Tupac scene" has been shot for the film. Entertainment Weekly reported that the role of Tupac Shakur in the film will be played by newcomer Marcc Rose, who was once rumored to be cast by John Singleton in the upcoming Tupac biopic.


=== Filming ===
Principal photography for Straight Outta Compton began on location in Compton, California on August 5, 2014. In early September 2014, principal exterior shooting on a large post-riot set was observed on Laurel Canyon Boulevard in North Hollywood.


== Release ==


=== Marketing ===
On February 8, 2015, Universal Studios released the first official trailer. The red band trailer was preceded by an introduction featuring N.W.A members Dr. Dre and Ice Cube. A second global trailer for Straight Outta Compton was released on April 1, 2015 and attached with theatrical screenings of Universal's Furious 7.
On August 7, 2015, Dr. Dre released the album Compton: A Soundtrack by Dr. Dre exclusively on Apple Music and the iTunes Store. Though not an official soundtrack to the film Straight Outta Compton, Dr. Dre said this album would be "inspired by the movie," "During principal photography of Straight Outta Compton, I felt myself going to the studio and being so inspired by the movie that I started recording an album," Dre said on The Pharmacy, his radio show on Beats 1. "It's an 'inspired by' album. It's inspired by Straight Outta Compton." Dr. Dre says he will donate royalties from his new album to the city of Compton for a new performing arts facility.
The same day, to help promote the film, Beats by Dre launched a new app through the website StraightOuttaSomewhere.com. The app allows users to create a meme by uploading a picture with the "Straight Outta" logo and fill in the blank with a location of their choice. Some people did proclaimed that they were "Straight Outta" a certain city or locale while others uploaded funny images and phrases. In under 24 hours, over 78,000 "Straight Outta" images were uploaded on social media sites. Inquisitr.com proclaimed, "It’s a successful viral photo campaign that is definitely bringing attention to the movie Straight Outta Compton."


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
Preliminary reports suggests that the film will open to around $25–35 million or as high as $43 million in its opening weekend in the United States and Canada.


=== Critical reception ===
Straight Outta Compton has received positive reviews from critics. On Rotten Tomatoes, it has a rating of 85%, based on 67 reviews, with an average rating of 7.2/10. The site's consensus reads, "Straight Outta Compton is a biopic that's built to last, thanks to F. Gary Gray's confident direction and engaging performances from a solid cast." On Metacritic, it has a score of 71 out of 100, based on 30 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
IGN gave the film a score of 7.9/10, saying "Straight Outta Compton is an entertaining, powerful and relevant take on the rise and fall of rap group N.W.A.".


== Controversies ==
On July 16, 2014, a casting call for extras for Straight Outta Compton was released on the Sande Alessi Casting Facebook page. The casting call was looking for African-American girls for the film using an A-D ranking scale. Though the "A girls" category was looking for drop dead gorgeous "classy" women of all colors, the "B through D" categories were very explicitly linked with skin-tone. As the women get less attractive, the casting call wants the women's flesh tone to be darker, with the lowest listing calling for "African American girls. Poor, not in good shape. Medium to dark skin tone." The casting call post went viral as people expressed their outrage of what they call colorism, sexism, and racism in the categorizing of black women. A representative for Sande Alessi Casting said the ad was an "innocent mistake" and when it comes to casting "poor" people, they're also looking for women of various skin tones and body types. As for the A,B,C,D grouping system, Sande Alessi Casting says "it's the usual method [they] use to look for different types of people for any project and it wasn't meant to offend anyone."
On August 12, 2014, TMZ reported that just seven days into filming in Compton, a drive-by shooting took place directly in front of the cast and crew members while they were on the set of the film Straight Outta Compton. A group of men standing outside the Compton Courthouse flashed gang signs at a passing car and passengers in the car opened fire on the group. No one affiliated with the film was injured or hurt, but one civilian near the set was shot. Despite the incident, it was announced that filming would continue to take place as planned in the city.
In December 2014, during a show in Sydney, Australia, Ice Cube gave concertgoers a sneak peek at the first Straight Outta Compton trailer. When asked about the trailer leak, executive producer of the film Will Packer stated "Cube does what he does." He added, "Cube is the man. We back him. And I love the fact that it's out there and it's getting the response that it's getting, that's what I'll say."
On January 29, 2015, Suge Knight was involved in a hit-and-run incident that left one man dead and another hospitalized. Witnesses claim that Knight followed the men after an argument on the Straight Outta Compton film set to a burger stand parking lot in Compton, California, and that the collisions looked intentional. Security footage video was released online in early March showing Knight running over both men but which Knight's attorney said helps his client's self-defense claim. Killed was Terry Carter, co-founder (along with Ice Cube) of Heavyweight Records and a friend of Knight. The second victim, filmmaker Cle Sloan, suffered a mangled foot and head injuries.
On June 10, 2015, MC Ren took to Twitter to voice his displeasure at the lack of exposure his character has in the Straight Outta Compton trailer, saying "Man fuck these bitches at universal pictures leaving me out the movie trailers tryin to rewrite history." and "When you have bitches work on a hip hop film that don't know shit about hip hop this is what happens. How the hell u leave me out after all".


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Straight Outta Compton at the Internet Movie Database
Straight Outta Compton at Box Office Mojo
Straight Outta Compton at Rotten Tomatoes
Straight Outta Compton at Metacritic
Straight Outta Compton at History vs. Hollywood