Suicide Squad (film)
Suicide Squad is an upcoming American superhero film based on the DC Comics antihero team of the same name. It is intended to be the third installment in the DC Extended Universe. The film is written and directed by David Ayer, and stars an ensemble cast featuring Will Smith, Jared Leto, Margot Robbie, Joel Kinnaman, Jai Courtney, Cara Delevingne, Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje, Karen Fukuhara, Jay Hernandez, Adam Beach, and Viola Davis.
By February 2009, a Suicide Squad film was in development at Warner Bros. Pictures. Ayer signed on to write and direct in September 2014 and by October the casting process had begun. Principal photography began on April 13, 2015 in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. The film is scheduled to be released on August 5, 2016.


== CastEdit ==

Will Smith as Deadshot: An expert marksman and assassin.
Jared Leto as The Joker: A psychopathic supervillain. Leto described his role as a "nearly Shakespearean character" and a "beautiful disaster of a character".
Margot Robbie as Harley Quinn: A crazed supervillain and former psychiatrist.
Joel Kinnaman as Rick Flag: A military officer. Tom Hardy was previously cast in the role but was forced to drop out due to scheduling conflicts.
Jai Courtney as Boomerang: An Australian assassin who utilizes deadly boomerangs.
Cara Delevingne as Enchantress: A powerful sorceress.
Viola Davis as Amanda Waller: Davis stated she is fascinated by the character, singling out her psychology and strength and describing her as a "powerful black woman, hard, ready to pick up a gun and shoot anyone at will."
Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje as Killer Croc: A supervillain who suffers from a skin condition that causes him to develop reptilian features.
Karen Fukuhara as Katana: An expert martial artist and swordswoman.
Jay Hernandez as El Diablo
Adam Beach as Slipknot
Additionally, Scott Eastwood, Ike Barinholtz, Common, Alex Meraz, David Harbour, Jim Parrack, Corina Calderon and Raymond Olubowale have been cast in unspecified roles.


== ProductionEdit ==


=== DevelopmentEdit ===
In February 2009, Warner Bros. was developing a Suicide Squad film, with Dan Lin, Colin Wilson, and Charles Roven producing, and Justin Marks writing the script. David Ayer signed on to direct and write the film in September 2014. On October 20, 2014, director Ayer talked to Empire Online about the film, and he said "that it's a Dirty Dozen with supervillains" as he based the screenplay on various Suicide Squad comics and material for the screenplay. Citing a reason that "The DC Universe is too rich to go very far astray." On March 28, 2015, Ayer teased that the film would also feature Arkham Asylum, in which several members of the Suicide Squad are incarcerated.


=== CastingEdit ===
In October 2014, Warner Bros. had offered Ryan Gosling, Tom Hardy, Margot Robbie, and Will Smith roles in the film. Soon after, it was reported that Hardy and Smith were close to signing on while Robbie was also finalizing a deal as she left DreamWorks' Ghost in the Shell for this film. In November, The Wrap revealed that Jared Leto was in talks for the role of Joker, which Gosling was originally sought for. Later that month, it was announced that Robbie was confirmed for the role of Harley Quinn. Hardy was in talks for Rick Flag, a founding member of the Suicide Squad, and Smith's role was unclear. In December 2014, it was confirmed by Warner Bros. that Smith, Hardy, Leto, Robbie, Jai Courtney, and Cara Delevingne had all signed on to star in the film as Deadshot, Rick Flag, Joker, Harley Quinn, Captain Boomerang, and Enchantress, respectively. The studio was also considering Viola Davis, Octavia Spencer, and Oprah Winfrey for the role of Amanda Waller. Following the announcement of the cast, comic book writer John Ostrander (creator of the modern incarnation of the Suicide Squad) talked with Comic Book Resources about the casting, saying, "I have no problem with the casting... what I am really impressed by with all of the casting is that they are getting some very good actors to play these parts."
In January 2015, Davis expressed interest in playing Amanda Waller during an interview, saying "I'm fascinated by her (Waller)." Meanwhile, Tom Hardy had to drop out as Rick Flag because of scheduling issues with his film The Revenant. Jake Gyllenhaal was then offered to replace Hardy as Flag, but he declined. The studio were then looking at Joel Edgerton, Jon Bernthal, and Joel Kinnaman to play the role. In February, Jay Hernandez joined the cast and Kinnaman was also confirmed to play Flag. At the 87th Academy Awards, Davis confirmed that she had been cast as Amanda Waller. In March 2015, boxer Raymond Olubawale was reported to have an unspecified role in the film, and Scott Eastwood announced that he had been cast on Twitter. Later that month, it was confirmed that Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje and Karen Fukuhara had been cast as Killer Croc and Katana, respectively. Adam Beach, Ike Barinholtz, and Jim Parrack were added to the cast in April 2015.


=== FilmingEdit ===

Filming was scheduled to begin in mid-April and end in August 2015, utilizing different locations in and around Toronto, Ontario. On December 1, 2014, The Hollywood Reporter revealed that the Pinewood Toronto Studios had been booked to start the pre-production in February, and that filming would take place from mid-April to September. Filming was intended to commence on April 15, 2015 in Toronto. In February 2015, Ayer tweeted some photos from the set, while they were preparing to start the production. In early-March 2015, Leto tweeted his new look with shaved beard and trimmed locks in preparation for his role. Filming began on April 13, 2015 and will conclude on August 30, 2015. Filming commenced on April 13, 2015. On April 26 and 27, filming is scheduled to take place at the Hy's Steakhouse. A "snowstorm" scene was filmed on April 29 on the Adelaide St. and in Ching Lane. On May 5, a few major scenes were filmed in downtown Toronto next to Yonge and Dundas square. Street signs were removed for privacy reasons during filming that night. Later in the month, a Batman stunt double was seen on set chasing down the Joker and Harley Quinn in Toronto.


== MarketingEdit ==
Suicide Squad held a panel at the 2015 San Diego Comic-Con International, with stars Smith, Robbie, Courtney, Davis and Kinnaman amongst those who appeared. During which, they premiered a trailer intended to be exclusive to the event, but was leaked online, with Warner Bros. responding by stating they would not release an official version. However, the following day, Warner Bros. released an official version, stating: "Warner Bros. Pictures and our anti-piracy team have worked tirelessly over the last 48 hours to contain the Suicide Squad footage that was pirated from Hall H on Saturday. We have been unable to achieve that goal. Today we will release the same footage that has been illegally circulating on the web, in the form it was created and high quality with which it was intended to be enjoyed. We regret this decision as it was our intention to keep the footage as a unique experience for the Comic-Con crowd, but we cannot continue to allow the film to be represented by the poor quality of the pirated footage stolen from our presentation."


== ReleaseEdit ==
Suicide Squad is scheduled to be released on August 5, 2016.


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
Official website
Suicide Squad at the Internet Movie Database
Suicide Squad at Box Office Mojo
Suicide Squad at Rotten Tomatoes
Suicide Squad at Metacritic