The Gift (2015 film)
The Gift is an American psychological thriller film written, produced, and directed by Joel Edgerton, making his directorial debut. The film stars Jason Bateman, Rebecca Hall, and Edgerton, and was released in the United States on August 7, 2015 by STX Entertainment.


== Plot ==
A young married couple, Simon (Bateman) and Robyn (Hall), are living what appears to be a picture-perfect life. They have relocated from Chicago to suburban Los Angeles, near where Simon grew up. The move comes as a result of Robyn's miscarriage, which was due to the stress of her job and big-city life. While out buying supplies for their new home, they run into Gordo (Edgerton), a former high school classmate of Simon's, who Simon claims to have completely forgotten about.
Gordo begins dropping in unannounced to the couple's new home, usually when Simon is at work. He is initially kind to the couple, frequently bringing them gifts, such as a bottle of wine, glass cleaner, and koi fish. Simon feels put off by the friendship, as he remembers Gordo as "Gordo the Weirdo" from high school. Gordo invites Simon and Robyn to dinner at his home, which is very large and elegant. Minutes after they arrive, he receives a phone call, and drives off, saying he will return within five minutes. While he is gone, Simon mocks Gordo, and the couple explore his house, which indicates he has children. When he returns, Gordo tells them that his wife left him and took his children, and she was on the phone. Following this revelation, Simon tells Robyn to wait in the car, and then ends their friendship with Gordo, telling him to stop coming by their house.
The next day, Simon and Robyn's dog, Mr. Bojangles, goes missing, and the koi fish in their pond are dead. Simon immediately suspects Gordo and drives to his house to confront him, only to find out that it was not Gordo's home. They involve the police, who tell them that without evidence, the most they can do is question Gordo, and doing so would tip him off about their suspicions. Simon and Robyn also find out that Gordo has no children and most of what he told them about himself was a lie. While working from home, Robyn begins to suspect that she is not alone in the house, and after having trouble sleeping takes some stolen prescription pills that she hides from Simon. She becomes frightened, thinking that someone is in the house with her, collapses and wakes up the next morning in bed. Simon finds the hidden pills and questions Robyn about them, thinking that she has relapsed and is taking drugs combined with alcohol again as she had when they were in Chicago. They argue and Robyn is hurt that he doesn't believe her that she is being watched by Gordo. At his new job, Simon is rewarded with a promotion, as his one competitor for the job, Danny McDonald (Byrne), was disqualified after some troubling information is revealed from Danny's past job. Mr. Bojangles unexpectedly returns one night and Simon states that he believes Gordo is messing with them. Shortly after, they receive a letter from Gordo stating that he is sorry to have bothered them and writes that he was willing to "let bygones be bygones", directed at Simon. Time passes and Robyn reveals to Simon that she is pregnant again and they are both happy.
Robyn is still troubled by Gordo's last letter and wants to know what "bygones" Gordo was referring to. She believes that Simon is lying to her when she questions him about it. At a baby shower, Robyn questions Simon's sister about Gordo, who reveals that in high school, Simon and his friend Greg (David Denman) reported that Gordo was being molested by an older student. This incident allegedly "outed" Gordo as gay. Robyn tracks down Greg, now a chiropractor, and asks him about it. Greg becomes distraught and reveals that Simon fabricated the whole story just because he could. Greg states that Simon was a bully in high school with a "real mean streak" and Gordo was simply an easy target. Neither of them came forward to tell the truth and, as a result, Gordo's father nearly killed him because he believed Gordo was gay. This resulted in Gordo's father being arrested for attempted murder. Robyn searches Simon's home office and discovers that he ran background checks on Gordo and Danny McDonald. She confronts Simon about the story and he refuses to apologize for his part in it, saying that his father was hard on him as well, but that he still made something of himself and became successful. He refuses to believe or admit that he did anything wrong. Robyn tells Simon that he was a bully in high school and that he is a bully now. Eventually, Robyn begins feeling even more stressed and depressed, and tells Simon that he needs to make peace with Gordo. Simon goes to a bar where Gordo is serving as DJ for a trivia night and has a few drinks. He then finds Gordo behind the bar loading his gear into his van and attempts to apologize. Gordo sees through the fake apology and does not accept it, telling Simon "you may be done with the past, but the past isn't done with you." Simon then attacks Gordo and tells him he will destroy him if he comes near his house or Robyn.
Simon is hosting a party at their house to celebrate his promotion with some of his friends and colleagues, when someone throws a rock through their sliding glass door. They catch the culprit and Simon's work friends recognize him as Danny McDonald, Simon's competition for his new promotion. He claims to have seen an email that Simon sent, fabricating all of the information that disqualified him for the promotion and led to him getting fired. Simon decides to let Danny go and because of all the excitement, Robyn goes into labor. The next morning after a successful delivery, Simon gets a phone call from work, informing him that they know he lied to get the job over Danny and that he is fired. Robyn tells Simon that she does not want to go back to their house with him, indicating that she wants to separate. Simon tells her that he is going to take a shower after their long night, then will come back to talk about it with her.
Once home, Simon finds another gift from Gordo on their front step. It is a baby cradle with three separately wrapped gifts inside it. The first contains a house key, which unlocks their front door. The second is an audio CD, which had recorded Simon mocking Gordo when they thought he was on the phone at his dinner party. The third is a DVD, which shows footage of Robyn and Simon eating dinner and sleeping in their home. It also shows Robyn collapsing while home alone and Gordo taking her into the bedroom, stroking her unconscious body. The footage immediately ends, leaving it ambiguous as to whether Gordo raped Robyn. While this is happening, Gordo visits Robyn in the hospital, bringing her flowers. She asks if his injuries came from Simon. Gordo tells her that people will get what they deserve and leaves. Simon rushes back to the hospital and glimpses Gordo getting on the elevator. He tries to chase him down, but loses him. Gordo calls Simon, while watching him through a window. Simon wants to know if Gordo raped Robyn and wonders if the baby is his. Gordo toys with him, telling him that he did not rape her, but then says maybe he did and that it's "all in the [baby's] eyes". Simon rushes back in to look at his baby, which Robyn is holding. While Simon slumps down to the hospital floor, sobbing with his head in his hands, Gordo is hidden behind a nearby door, watching him and then walks away.


== Cast ==
Jason Bateman as Simon Callen
Rebecca Hall as Robyn Callen
Joel Edgerton as Gordon "Gordo" Moseley
Tim Griffin as Kevin "KK" Keelor
Allison Tolman as Lucy
Beau Knapp as Detective Walker
P.J. Byrne as Danny McDonald
David Denman as Greg
Busy Philipps as Duffy
Wendell Pierce as Detective Mills
Katie Aselton as Joan


== Production ==


=== Development ===
The project was first announced in August 2012, when it was reported that Joel Edgerton had written a psychological thriller script titled Weirdo, with which Edgerton would also be making his directing debut. His inspirations for the screenplay include Alfred Hitchcock, Fatal Attraction, and Michael Haneke's 2005 Austrian film Caché.


=== Casting ===
On September 9, 2013, talking with Screen International, Edgerton stated that he would be starring in the film in a supporting role, and that he would also produce, along with Rebecca Yeldham, through Blue-Tongue Films. Rebecca Hall signed on to star in the film on November 3, 2014. It was also confirmed that Jason Blum would also produce the film through his Blumhouse Productions banner. On January 13, 2015, Jason Bateman was set to star in the film, as Hall's character's husband.


=== Filming ===
Principal photography on the film began on January 19, 2015, and ended on February 20, 2015. A majority of filming took place at a home in the Hollywood Hills neighborhood, where STX Entertainment also held promotional interviews for the film. The film was shot on an Arri Alexa with Canon C35 lenses, and was filmed in 25 days, according to its cinematographer, Eduard Grau. Grau was recommended by Nash Edgerton, who served as The Gift's Stunt Coordinator, after the two were part of the production for the 2013 short film Streetcar.
In an interview with Collider.com, Joel Edgerton revealed that he did not start filming his acting role until two weeks into shooting (devoting that time, instead, solely to directing). As soon as he did, his older brother Nash assisted on set behind the camera. Joel Edgerton completed shooting his role as Gordo in seven days.


=== Distribution ===
On January 20, 2015, STX Entertainment bought the United States distribution rights to the film. STX retitled the film The Gift. The film is Edgerton’s fourth feature screenplay to be filmed, after The Square (2008), Felony (2013) and The Rover (2014).


== Release ==
STX Entertainment initially set The Gift for domestic release on July 31, 2015, and later moved it to August 7, 2015.


=== Marketing ===
The first trailer for The Gift was released on April 1, 2015. It premiered on Twitter's live video streaming app Periscope, making STX Entertainment the first advertiser to work with Twitter on a campaign incorporating Periscope.


== Reception ==
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has a rating of 92%, based on 104 reviews, with an average rating of 7.5/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "The Gift is wickedly smart and playfully subversive, challenging the audience's expectations while leaving them leaning on the edges of their seats." Metacritic gives the film a score of 78 out of 100, based on 30 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". On CinemaScore, audiences gave the film an average grade of "B" on an A+ to F scale.
Time Out's Daisy Bowie-Sell praised The Gift as "darkly unnerving", commending its ending and comparing it positively to a similar film, The Hand That Rocks the Cradle. In a review for Indiewire, Katie Walsh lamented the film's use of common thriller cliches and restraint towards the climax, but lauded Joel Edgerton's direction, concluding: "His deft, controlled maneuvering of plot, character, style, and tone is damn near perfect for his feature debut—even if it is in service of a very standard genre piece." Conversely, Norman Wilner of Now criticized Edgerton's directorial debut as full of "mistakes and bad calls", ultimately giving The Gift a 2/5 rating.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
The Gift at the Internet Movie Database
The Gift at Box Office Mojo
The Gift at Rotten Tomatoes
The Gift at Metacritic