Trainwreck (film)
Trainwreck is a 2015 American romantic comedy film directed by Judd Apatow and written by Amy Schumer (marking the first film Apatow directed but did not himself write). The film stars Schumer and Bill Hader along with an ensemble cast that includes Tilda Swinton, Brie Larson, Colin Quinn, Vanessa Bayer, John Cena and LeBron James.
Principal photography began on May 19, 2014 in New York City. The film premiered at the 2015 South by Southwest Film Festival on March 15, 2015, and was released theatrically in the United States on July 17, 2015, by Universal Pictures.


== Plot ==
Gordon Townsend (Colin Quinn) is telling his two daughters Amy (Devin Fabry) and Kim (Carly Oudin) that he and their mother are divorcing because monogamy isn't realistic. Twenty-three years later, Amy (Amy Schumer) regularly gets drunk, stoned, parties and sleeps with many guys, even though she's already dating a gym-addict Steven (John Cena).
Amy works at S'nuff, a men's magazine. She goes into a work meeting where her boss, Dianna (Tilda Swinton), asks for pitches for new articles. One of her co-workers (Randall Park), pitches an article about a sports doctor, Aaron Conners (Bill Hader). Amy makes fun of the idea, saying sports are stupid. Dianna thinks that Amy's take on the article will be the most interesting and assigns the article to her, despite the fact that she doesn't want it.
Amy goes to her dad's house to help her sister Kim (Brie Larson) pack the place up; Gordon has multiple sclerosis and has moved into an assisted living home. Kim is married to Tom (Mike Birbiglia) and has a stepson, Allister, who annoys Amy. Kim resents their dad because he slept around, was a drunk, and cheated on their mom. She thinks they can't afford the nice assisted living place they've put him in, but Amy wants to make it work. Amy later visits Gordon in the home, and he becomes upset when she tells him Kim threw away a lot of his Mets memorabilia.
Amy goes to meet Aaron to set up their interview schedules. That night, Amy goes on a date with Steven. He's upset that she's drunk, and their loud conversation gets him into a fight with the other moviegoers. Amy goes outside to smoke a joint, and when she comes back, Steven asks her who all the guys on her phone are. They go outside where Amy admits she sleeps with other guys; Steven is hurt, since he thought they were exclusive. Amy says that she's too stoned and asks if she can leave. Steven tells her she's not a nice person and leaves, crushed.
Amy gets brunch with Kim, and after Kim doesn't have a mimosa, she realizes she's pregnant. They go to Gordon to tell him, and he's thrilled to finally have a biological grandchild, which makes Kim angry, since she says Allister is his grandchild. Gordon says Allister isn't really his grandchild, and after he and Amy make fun of the kid together, Kim leaves, furious.
Amy interviews Aaron at his sports facility and she tests out a treadmill body-imaging suit, running when she gets a text from Kim saying she wants to move Gordon to a cheaper facility. Amy asks to slow down the treadmill and starts to have a full panic attack. Aaron coaches her breathing and calms her down, and suggests they get food. They bond over dinner: he compliments her writing, she learns about his family. After some drinks they get in a cab to leave. They go to his place and sleep together, and Amy breaks her rule by staying the night.
The next day, Amy tells her co-worker Nikki (Vanessa Bayer) about what happened, and Aaron calls to ask if they can see each other again. Amy panics and tells him they'll talk about it at the interview. She and Nikki decide she has to end it. Meanwhile, Aaron's friend, LeBron James, is excited for him; Aaron hasn't dated anyone in five years. Amy goes to watch Aaron perform surgery to "Uptown Girl", his favorite song, and afterwards tries to politely break things off, but he insists they like each other and should date. Then Amy gets a phone call that her dad had a fall. Aaron drives her to the home where Aaron stitches up her dad's cut and impresses him with his sports knowledge.
Aaron and Amy begin dating and fall for each other. Amy is worried she's going to mess up the relationship, but Kim tells her she's just finally doing what everyone else does. Amy goes with Aaron to a charity slam dunk contest hosted by LeBron. There players perform trampoline dunks, and the Knicks City Dancers perform. Amy ridicules them for being like strippers. LeBron confronts Amy and asks her what her intentions are with Aaron. Confused, she assures him they're fine. Later, Amy goes to see Gordon, and he disapproves of her relationship with Aaron. He says he knows she's just like him; she can't have a stable relationship. Amy leaves, angry.
Aaron goes with Amy to Kim's baby shower. Tom makes a comment to Aaron about how Amy sleeps around that unnerves him. Meanwhile, Amy can't stand being at the shower and deliberately grosses out Kim's friends with tales of her sex-capades. A couple days later, Kim calls her; Amy starts to apologize for the shower when Kim tells her Gordon has died, as he was hoarding his meds in the nursing home. At the funeral, Amy gives a speech, asking everyone to "raise your hand if my dad ever offended you" and then "raise your hand if he was also one of your favorite people". After the funeral, she and Kim get into a fight; Amy says Kim didn't even like Gordon anyway. Aaron tells her he loves her, but Amy can't believe it because he picked the worst time to say it (at her father's funeral). Meanwhile, at work, Dianna tells Amy they're cutting the Aaron story because it was boring.
Aaron is receiving a prestigious award at a luncheon and brings Amy. While accepting his award, Amy gets continual calls and text from her boss Diana, who threatens to fire her if she doesn't answer. So she chooses to take the call and leaves during his speech. After his speech, Aaron finds her smoking pot outside and is upset. They continue arguing at her apartment, and Aaron thinks they shouldn't go to bed angry, so Amy lets him have it, keeping him awake all night ranting and raving, even though the next day is Aaron's big surgery on Amar'e Stoudemire. Aaron shows up very tense due to the lack of sleep, and Amar'e panics and cancels the surgery. Aaron goes home and tells Amy that they need to take a break. Hurt, Amy reacts by telling him that they can just break up because the article was canceled. Aaron leaves.
Amy returns to her old ways and goes out drinking at a bar with her co-workers, including an intern. He invites her back to his place, and their bizarre sexual encounter is interrupted when his mom enters, revealing that he is only 16. After Amy nearly commits statutory rape, Dianna fires Amy. Aaron is moping all day in his apartment until LeBron calls telling him he's been hurt. Aaron rushes over to find an intervention for him consisting of LeBron, Matthew Broderick, Chris Evert, and Marv Albert. They tell him he's always been afraid of opening up and needs to make things right with Amy, but Aaron insists Amy and he are over.
Amy goes to Kim to mend fences after their fight. After she tells Kim everything that's happened, Kim tells her maybe it's time to change. Amy clears out all the booze from her apartment and goes and pitches her Aaron story at Vanity Fair, who end up publishing it. She sends the article to Aaron and he smiles. He successfully performs the surgery on Amar'e and attends Amar'e's first game post-op. After the game, Aaron is called to the court, where the Knicks City Dancers perform with Amy front and center, attempting to do the dance. Included in the songs is "Uptown Girl". For the grand finale, the slam dunk guys come back, and Amy races and jumps off the trampoline to make a dunk and immediately face plants. Aaron rushes over to see if she's okay, and she tells him she was trying to show him that she can work hard and try, and she wants to make it work. She tells him she loves him, and they kiss.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
On August 26, 2013, Universal Studios optioned an untitled script written by Amy Schumer that she would also star in. On November 27, 2013, it was announced that Judd Apatow would direct the film. On January 8, 2014, it was announced that the film would be released on July 24, 2015. On January 30, 2014, Bill Hader joined the cast of the film. On February 18, 2014, Brie Larson also joined the cast. On March 28, 2014, Colin Quinn, Barkhad Abdi, Mike Birbiglia, Jon Glaser, Vanessa Bayer, John Cena, Ezra Miller and Tilda Swinton were cast in the film, though Abdi ultimately did not appear in the film. On May 7, 2014, Method Man and LeBron James joined the cast of the film. On June 30, Daniel Radcliffe was spotted filming some scenes for the film, which confirmed his casting. On July 1, Marisa Tomei was also confirmed to appear, in scenes with Radcliffe. In an interview with The New York Times, Schumer revealed that Apatow and she dismissed their first idea for a story (later revealed to have Schumer as a used-car saleswoman), and shifted to an amplified and comedic version of Schumer's own past as its basis.


=== Filming ===
Principal photography began on May 19, 2014, in New York City. On June 2, the crew began filming in the area of Manhattan and Long Island. Principal photography ended on August 1, 2014.
Editing on the movie began with the start of filming; the movie was finalized in December 2014.


=== Music ===
Jon Brion composed the music for the film.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
As of August 9, 2015, Trainwreck has grossed $91.1 million in North America and $6.1 million in other territories for a total gross of $97.2 million, against a budget of $35 million.
In the United States and Canada, Trainwreck opened on July 17, 2015, the same day as the superhero film Ant-Man. Initial projections had the film opening to around $20 million, with The Hollywood Reporter noting that it could over-perform if it takes off among females or under-perform given how R-rated comedies have struggled over the summer, with both Ted 2 and Magic Mike XXL underperforming. It made $1.8 million on Thursday night showings, which began at 8 p.m. from 2,363 theaters, and $10.7 million on its opening day. Through its opening weekend, it grossed $30.097 million from 3,158 theaters, exceeding expectations. This was Apatow's second biggest debut as a director (just behind the $30.69 million debut of Knocked Up) and the sixth-biggest debut for a film that he was involved in as a writer, director or producer. The film played 69% female with 66% over 25 years old which is typical for an R-rated comedy. According to a poll conducted by Rentrak in its opening weekend, 28% of respondents said they went to see the film because of Schumer.


=== Critical reception ===
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an 85% approval rating, based on 170 reviews, with a rating average of 7.2/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Trainwreck drags commitment out of all but the most rom-com-phobic filmgoers with sharp humor, relatable characters, and hilarious work from Amy Schumer." On Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating, the film has a score of 75 out of 100, based on 45 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". CinemaScore reported that audiences gave the film an "A-" grade on an A+ to F scale.
Benjamin Lee of The Guardian gave the film three out of five stars, stating, "Judd Apatow's latest is rough around the edges, but his focus on a female protagonist refreshes a genre in sore need of change". Ian Crouch, writing for The New Yorker, commended LeBron James' performance, writing that "it seems safe to declare that he has given the greatest motion-picture acting performance by an active professional basketball player of all time." Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a B+, saying "Beneath all of his bad-boy shtick, Apatow's always been a pretty conventional moralist. But Schumer gives their raunchy rom-com enough of her signature spikiness to prevent it from ever feeling predictable." Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune gave the film three and a half stars out of four, saying "Schumer and Hader are wonderful together. Gender inequity in the world of comedy deserves all the overdue attention it's getting, and more. But there are matters of craft, wit (no matter how crude the jokes) and timing that transcend chromosomes." Jacob Hall of the New York Daily News gave the film four out of five stars, saying "Schumer raises Apatow's game beautifully. Her biting, pitch-black wit and his penchant for character-driven comedy go together like gin and tonic." Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film three and a half stars out of four, saying "Sweet is not how Schumer wants Trainwreck to go down. She wants to explode rom-com clichés and replace them with something fierce and ready to rumble. Done."
Sara Stewart of the New York Post gave the film four out four stars, saying "Trainwreck is a corrective to a lot of outdated clichés. It's very funny and sweet and even a little weepy, and it has maybe the best scene ever filmed of dirty talk gone wrong." Ty Burr of The Boston Globe gave the film three out of four stars, saying "Trainwreck serves as confirmation that a star is born, a seemingly average woman whose above-average superpowers include reminding us of our own. Where she goes from here should be fascinating to watch." Brian Truitt of USA Today gave the film three out of four stars, saying "With films such as Funny People and This Is 40, Apatow has toyed with finding the right blend of the serious and the hilarious and finally hits it here." Moira MacDonald of The Seattle Times gave the film three out of four stars, saying "There's nothing remotely fresh about this plotline (or the way Apatow, true to form, makes the movie 20 minutes longer than it should be), but Trainwreck works as comedy more often than it doesn't - and that's rare enough." Alonso Duralde of The Wrap said, "Ultimately comes down in favor of mainstream girl-gets-boy in a way that Inside Amy Schumer might find a little dubious, but it never feels like Schumer is aggressively watering down her uniquely prickly brand of comedy for a mass audience."


== Shooting in Lafayette, Louisiana ==

On July 23, 2015, a shooting occurred at The Grand 16 Theater movie theater in Lafayette, Louisiana during a showing of Trainwreck. John Russell Houser, age 59, opened fire during a showing of the film, killing two people and injuring nine others before he committed suicide.
Schumer posted on her Twitter account: "My heart is broken and all my thoughts and prayers are with everyone in Louisiana." Universal Studios, the film's distributor, also released a statement: "All of us at Universal Pictures send our heartfelt sympathies to the victims of this senseless tragedy and their families in Louisiana."


== References ==


== External links ==
Trainwreck at the Internet Movie Database
Trainwreck at Box Office Mojo
Trainwreck at Rotten Tomatoes
Trainwreck at Metacritic