Vacation (2015 film)
Vacation is a 2015 American comedy film directed and written by John Francis Daley and Jonathan Goldstein (in their directorial debuts). It stars Ed Helms, Christina Applegate, Leslie Mann, and Chris Hemsworth. It is the fifth theatrical installment of the National Lampoon's Vacation series, being loosely inspired by the original 1983 National Lampoon's Vacation film, and was released by Warner Bros. on July 29, 2015.
The film received mixed to negative reviews from critics. On Rotten Tomatoes, it has a rating of 25%, based on 102 reviews, as well as a reviewer consensus statement viewing it as a "nostalgia-driven retread that misses the mark." However, the movie was a general box office success. During its opening weekend, it grossed $14.7 million and was the second biggest film in theaters just behind Mission: Impossible — Rogue Nation.


== Plot ==
Rusty Griswold (Ed Helms) is a disenchanted pilot for Econo-Air, and he shares a very estranged relationship with his wife, Debbie (Christina Applegate), and their two sons, the shy and anxious older son, James (Skyler Gisondo), and the cruel and mean-spirited younger son, Kevin (Steele Stebbins). Envious of the vacation the family of his friends, Jack (Keegan-Michael Key) and Nancy (Regina Hall), had in Paris, he decides to nix his family's annual trip to their cabin in Cheboygan, Michigan and instead drive cross country to Walley World, just as he had years before with his parents and sister (as seen in the original Vacation film).
Along the way, the Griswolds make many stops. The first is Memphis, where it's revealed that the otherwise laid-back Debbie was an extremely promiscuous woman in college. While staying at a motel, James meets Adena (Catherine Missal), a girl his age that he saw while driving on the highway, but is scared away by Rusty trying to entice her towards him in a very creepy awkward way. In Arkansas, they are led to a supposedly hidden spring by a drifter, but when they realize that it's a sewage dump, they return to their car only to see it broken into and their luggage and cash stolen. They're then forced to stop in Texas to receive assistance from Rusty's sister, Audrey (Leslie Mann), and her husband, Stone Crandall (Chris Hemsworth). Rusty begins to suspect tension in his relationship with Debbie due to Stone's obviously outward sexual behavior and actions, but she dispels his suspicions.
Spending the following night at an Arizona campsite, Rusty and Debbie go off to have an unsuccessful attempt at sex at the Four Corners while James finally asserts himself against Kevin with help from Adena (who also happens to be there). The next morning, after nearly getting killed by a suicidal rafting guide (Charlie Day) in the Grand Canyon, their rental car runs out of gas in the middle of the desert and explodes, leading Rusty to relent over the miserable trip and walk off alone. After being tailed-down by a seemingly manic truck driver (Norman Reedus) over what was thought to be a derogatory comment left by Kevin earlier in the trip, he instead returns Debbie's missing wedding ring and gives them a lift to San Francisco, where they spend the night at a bed-and-breakfast run by Rusty's parents, Clark (Chevy Chase) and Ellen (Beverly D'Angelo), with the intent of flying home to Chicago the next day. It's there that Rusty and Debbie confront each other about their eroding marriage and decide to start over again.
With some coaxing by Clark the next morning, Rusty decides to drive his family to Walley World to ride their newest coaster, Velociraptor. After spending the entire day waiting in line, they are cut off by a more successful airline pilot rival of Rusty's and his family before the announcement of the park's closing. The two families brawl in the line, ending with the other family deciding to flee. The Griswolds finally board the ride, but it stalls halfway up a loop, and they are rescued after several hours. They are brought closer by the experience, and Rusty uses his airline connections to spend a relaxing vacation in Paris alone with Debbie.


== Cast ==


== Production ==


=== Development ===
In 2010, it was announced by New Line Cinema (owned by Warner Bros., which released the previous films) that a new Vacation film was being produced. Produced by David Dobkin and written by John Francis Daley and Jonathan Goldstein, the story focuses on Rusty Griswold as he takes his own family to Walley World.


=== Casting ===
In July 2012, it was announced that Ed Helms would star in the sequel as Rusty Griswold, who now has his own family misadventures on the road. On March 28, 2013, Variety announced that original series stars Beverly D'Angelo and Chevy Chase were in talks to reprise their roles, most likely in the form of a torch-passing cameo role. No mention was made of other series regulars, such as Randy Quaid's Cousin Eddie.
On April 23, 2013, it was reported that the film had been delayed indefinitely, due to creative differences. Later, Chris Hemsworth and Charlie Day were also reported to co-star. Skyler Gisondo and Steele Stebbins played Rusty Griswold's sons along with Helms and Christina Applegate. On September 15, Leslie Mann joined the film to play Rusty's sister, Audrey Griswold. On September 29, Keegan-Michael Key and Regina Hall were cast to play family friends of the Griswolds.
On October 10, director Daley revealed in an interview that he might have a cameo with Samm Levine and Martin Starr, which would be a reunion of cult comedy show Freaks and Geeks, though it was not confirmed. On November 12, four actors joined to play Four Corners cops, Tim Heidecker, Nick Kroll, Kaitlin Olson, and Michael Peña.


=== Filming ===
Principal photography began on September 16, 2014, in Atlanta, Georgia. On September 16, scenes were filmed on location at the Olympic Flame Restaurant.

On September 30 and October 1, 2014, scenes were filmed on location at The Twelve Oaks Bed and Breakfast in historic Covington, GA. The Twelve Oaks was staged as Christina Applegate's character's sorority house, Triple Pi, and the location of her attempt to run the obstacle course once more to prove that she is the Chug Run champion.
Other scenes were shot around Piedmont and 6th avenues from October 6 to 8, including at the Shellmont Inn. On October 22, 2014, scenes were filmed at the U.S. National Whitewater Center in Charlotte, North Carolina. Scenes for Walley World were filmed at Six Flags Over Georgia.
In a similar vein to the original film's "Wagon Queen Family Truckster", the film features a custom-designed minivan named the "Tartan Prancer". Dubbed the "Honda of Albania", it is a heavily-modified Toyota Previa and features unconventional styling elements such as a mirror-image front and rear clip, complete with two sets of headlights (pulled from the Land Rover LR3/Discovery) and rearview mirrors, as well as dashboard buttons marked by nonsensical symbols. As part of a promotional tie-in with the film, Edmunds.com released a tongue-in-cheek review comparing the Tartan Prancer against the 2015 Honda Odyssey.


=== Music ===
The musical score for the film was composed by Mark Mothersbaugh. A soundtrack album was released by WaterTower Music on July 24, 2015. In addition to Mothersbaugh's score, it features many contemporary songs as well as Lindsey Buckingham's "Holiday Road".


== Release ==
The film was originally set to be released on October 9, 2015, but it was moved to July 31, 2015, before finally being pushed up to July 29, 2015, on the 32nd anniversary of the release of the first Vacation film.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
Vacation grossed $1.2 million from its early Tuesday preview showings, and a combined $6.3 million on Wednesday and Thursday.
In its opening weekend, the film grossed $14.7 million, finishing in second at the box office behind Mission: Impossible – Rogue Nation ($55.5 million). As of August 12th, the film has made at least $21 million.


=== Critical response ===
Vacation received negative reviews from critics. On Rotten Tomatoes, it has a rating of 25%, based on 102 reviews, with an average rating of 4/10. The site's consensus reads, "Borrowing a basic storyline from the film that inspired it but forgetting the charm, wit, and heart, Vacation is yet another nostalgia-driven retread that misses the mark." On Metacritic, it has a score of 33 out of 100, based on 31 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". On CinemaScore filmgoers gave the film a grade of "B" on an A+ to F scale.


== References ==


== External links ==
Vacation at the Internet Movie Database
Vacation at Box Office Mojo
Vacation at Rotten Tomatoes
Vacation at Metacritic